 sports article do bodybuilders use evidence-based nutrition strategies to manipulate physique?
lachlan mitchell 1, id , daniel hackett 1 id , janelle gifford 1, frederico estermann 1 and helen oconnor 1,2 id 1 discipline of exercise and sport science, faculty of health sciences, university of sydney, 75 east street, lidcombe nsw 2141, australia; daniel.hackettsydney.edu.au d.h.; janelle.giffordsydney.edu.au j.g.; fest5296uni.sydney.edu.au f.e.; helen.oconnorsydney.edu.au h.o.c. 2 charles perkins centre, university of sydney, d17 john hopkins drive, camperdown nsw 2050, australia correspondence: lachlan.mitchellsydney.edu.au; tel.: 61-2-9036-7358 received: 4 september 2017; accepted: 26 september 2017; published: 29 september 2017 abstract: competitive bodybuilders undergo strict dietary and training practices to achieve an extremely lean and muscular physique.
the purpose of this study was to identify and describe different dietary strategies used by bodybuilders, their rationale, and the sources of information from which these strategies are gathered. in-depth interviews were conducted with seven experienced 10.4 3.4 years bodybuilding experience, male, natural bodybuilders. participants were asked about training, dietary and supplement practices, and information resources for bodybuilding strategies.
interviews were transcribed verbatim and analyzed using qualitative content analysis. during the off-season, energy intake was higher and less restricted than during the in-season to aid in muscle hypertrophy. there was a focus on high protein intake with adequate carbohydrate to permit high training loads. to create an energy deficit and loss of fat mass, energy intake was gradually and progressively reduced during the in-season via a reduction in carbohydrate and fat intake.
the rationale for weekly higher carbohydrate refeed days was to offset declines in metabolic rate and fatigue, while in the final peak week before competition, the reasoning for fluid and sodium manipulation and carbohydrate loading was to enhance the appearance of leanness and vascularity. other bodybuilders, coaches and the internet were significant sources of information.
despite the common perception of extreme, non-evidence-based regimens, these bodybuilders reported predominantly using strategies which are recognized as evidence-based, developed over many years of experience. additionally, novel strategies such as weekly refeed days to enhance fat loss, and sodium and uid manipulation, warrant further investigation to evaluate their efcacy and safety.
keywords: protein; peak week; refeed day; supplement 1. introduction competitive bodybuilders undergo strict dietary and training practices to achieve an extremely lean, muscular and symmetrical physique 1. along with resistance and aerobic exercise 2, targeted energy and macronutrient intakes are followed to accumulate muscle mass in the off-season, and reduce fat mass in the in-season 1.
however the specic dietary strategies employed by bodybuilders and their underpinning rationale remain poorly understood. contemporary literature examining the dietary intakes of bodybuilders is limited 1, and given the unique nature of competitive bodybuilding, it may be inappropriate to draw dietary parallels from other sports.
although bodybuilders have been reported to follow extreme, non-evidence-based approaches, several dietary strategies developed in bodybuilding have recently been scientically validated, such as frequent dosing of protein 3, and intake of protein around training 4.
identifying sports 2017, 5, 76; doi:10.3390sports5040076 www.mdpi.comjournalsports sports 2017, 5, 76 2 of 13 the dietary strategies of modern bodybuilders, and exploring their underpinning rationale, will provide exercise, sport and nutrition practitioners with an understanding of current bodybuilding methods and insights to assist with negotiating practical and effective ways to work towards bodybuilding goals.
furthermore, identifying such strategies will also generate hypotheses for future research. in-depth interviews allow a deep exploration of the discussed topic, enable the researchers to enter new areas and produce rich data, with an additional benet of uncovering practices that had not been anticipated 5,6.
the purpose of this study was to use in-depth interviews to identify and describe different dietary strategies used by male, natural bodybuilders, their rationale, and the sources of education from which these strategies are gathered. 2. materials and methods participants were purposively selected by the research team based on expertise and experience in competitive bodybuilding.
to recruit participants, experienced bodybuilders known to the researchers from previous studies were invited to participate. adverts were placed on the website and social media page of australasian natural bodybuilding anb, and distributed at the anb national titles in october 2015. to be included, participants needed to be male, natural drug-free bodybuilders, aged 18 years and older, with ve or more years of bodybuilding experience.
participants were required to have competed in the bodybuilding category at national or international level contests of drug-tested federations. 2.1. procedures the interviews were conducted by three members of the research team between march 2015 and february 2016. interviews 78124 min were held by telephone or skype.
the combined duration of all interviews was 11 h. interviews captured participant demographic characteristics including age, years of bodybuilding experience, number of previous competitions, and competition success. participants were asked about their training, dietary, supplement and competition preparation practices, the rationale behind these practices, and where they obtained information about nutrition and training. by the end of the last interview, no new major themes were emerging.
saturation was conrmed following coding of the data, therefore the decision was made to cease further data collection. 2.2. analysis all interviews were digitally recorded and transcribed by a commercial transcription service waywithwords.com. transcripts were returned to participants for verication and correction to ensure the transcription correctly reected the content of their interview. one participant returned the transcript with minor emendations, which was included in the analysis.
notes were taken during all interviews and used to clarify transcription errors, and to conrm the meaning of spoken phrases during the coding process. to protect the identity of the participants, a pseudonym was used in the nal transcripts. all interviews were conducted prior to thematic analysis via qualitative content analysis using qualitative data analysis software nvivo version 10.0, qsr international pty ltd., doncaster, australia, 2012.
coding was undertaken by one researcher lm with assistance from a second fe and overseen by a third researcher experienced in qualitative research jg, who reviewed any queries. as coding of data proceeded, underlying themes emerged as participants discussed topics introduced by the interviewers, and was not constrained by the original structure of the interview.
identication of themes recurring through and across interviews was achieved through a process of reading, coding, code category renement, rereading and code checking, and analysis of developing concepts. a coding journal with an audit trail of changes in coding and code renement was maintained by the primary coder lm to maintain transparency of the qualitative analysis process.
counts of coded talk were available from the analysis software by grouping for diet, training, supplements, and information and education. counts within themes could have more than one section of speech by the same participant. to avoid researcher bias during the data interpretation process sports 2017, 5, 76 3 of 13 based on preconceived ideas of bodybuilding practices, identied themes were sent to participants, who conrmed correct interpretation.
ethical approval was received from the university of sydney human ethics committee. written informed consent was provided by all participants. participation was voluntary and identity of participants and condentiality of their responses was ensured. 3. results a total of seven bodybuilders 10.4 3.4 years bodybuilding experience meeting inclusion criteria responded to advertisements and consented to participate. participant characteristics are summarized in table 1.
four participants had competed at national, and three at international level. two participants had competed professionally, with an additional one participant eligible to compete professionally. example quotes are presented in table 2. selected quotes were representative of themes identied during interviews. table 1. individual participant characteristics of seven experienced male, natural bodybuilders participating in in-depth interviews.
participant age years years of bodybuilding number of competitions competition category level of competition and competition success oliver 43 8 15 masters; weight category national fourth place luke 40 17 15 opens; weight category international winner; pro card kyle 25 7 15 opens; weight category international winner; pro card keith 22 7 8 teenage; junior national winner ben 30 13 12 opens; weight category national fourth place harry 32 10 9 opens; weight category state winner; pro card will 65 11 26 grand masters; ultra-grand masters international winner masters, 40 years; teenage, 19 years; junior, 1922 years; grand masters, 50 years; ultra-grand masters, 60 years.
sports 2017, 5, 76 4 of 13 table 2. thematic summary of dietary practices and sources of dietary education, in seven experienced male, natural bodybuilders participating in in-depth interviews. themes subthemes counts of coded text indicative quotes off-season meals 47 lunch would be, again, probably a 200-g chicken breast, one cooked cup of brown rice and maybe about 100 g of green veggies . . .
meal four, which is afternoon tea, which, prior to gym, is exactly the same as the meal before, the lunch meal, so the chicken, rice, veggie one, then after gym, which would be dinner, would be usually a meat, a red meat, so a steak, maybe a 200 g, you know, rump steak, another cooked cup of brown rice and some veggies, and thats dinner. oliver i have a dose of protein and carbohydrate with each meal . . . for protein i usually cycle between a few different sources.
i use whey protein, and then of course the one that is salmon, white esh sh, kangaroo and beef, theyre going to be my primary, ill cycle between those different protein sources keith carbohydrates 6 i dose my carbohydrate really high, because i want to make sure that my glucose metabolism is the best it possibly can be, because i will always diet on a high carbohydrate template to keep my training intensity high. keith protein 3 anywhere from 2.2 to 2.9 g per kilo body weight.
thats not total lean mass but just my total body weight. keith fat 3 i will direct my fat anywhere from 0.5 to a maximum 1.2 g per kilo, so i keep my fats relatively moderate. keith energy 3 so i might sit at anywhere from, i used to sit at between 4500 and 5000 calories per day in my off-season. keith in-season meals 34 each meal, just to start cutting the calories a little bit.
the egg yolks would go from the eggs at night, just down to egg white, just, again, to start cutting some calories, and they would slowly go down, so in four eggs would go only three yolks. and then a couple of weeks later itll be down to two yolks and then one yolk. luke carbohydrates 16 the carb value will slowly come down. around training, its going to remain quite high and in the morning its high-ish. but, yes, the carb value will slowly come down.
kyle usually i make a drop, and i will either dig from fats, or carbs, or a combination of.
im generally in favor of dropping carbohydrates initially and then digging into fats later, keith i dont have an issue with energy when i have my carbs around my training time, so pre-, intra- and post-workout is when i consume the majority of my carbohydrates through the day, luke i will actually introduce more carbohydrate for fuel, you know, to fuel the requirement to get through, say, a 35-min interval session, oliver protein 7 i normally keep protein static.
ill set it slightly higher than the off-season at the start of my prep and then just keep it the same throughout even if i lose weight. so if you were to look at it from a gram per kilogram basis, it would look like its going up, but its the same gram amount. so ill start at 225 g protein and just keep that throughout, so that will be roughly like 2.3, 2.4 g per kg, harry fat 7 i think i start with my fat probably around 25 of energy and then it might get as low as 15 to 20 at the end . . .
so a day at the very end might be 40 g of fat. harry
so for example, i might start the in-season with my fat around 65 g per day and then that will only get decreased by maximum of 25 g while the carbohydrates can drop from, you know, 250 g at the start or 275 g all the way down to 100 g at the end on my low days, harry energy 15 so i probably start on average about 24002500 calories per day across the seven days, and i probably nish around 2000 or 1900 per day with probably a twofold increase in cardio. harry refeed days refeed days 32
i have one day thats closer to my, like my off-season calories. so that might be like 2800 calories on a day predominantly increasing carbohydrate. thats to kind of stimulate further losses to prevent some of the downgrades in my energy expenditure you could say, and to replenish glycogen, to feel mentally refreshed, to get a break in. harry sports 2017, 5, 76 5 of 13 table 2. cont.
themes subthemes counts of coded text indicative quotes peak week carbohydrate loading 39 so normally, i will increase my carbohydrates early in the week, sometime around tuesday or wednesday for saturday show, taper them back down but not all the way down where they were at the lowest low. so maybe 400 g for a day and then down to say 350 gd, 300 gd, 250 gd, and then on friday and saturday, the show, i will be closer to 300 or the 400 gd range to kind of ll back out.
so its basically kind of like a modied carb loading strategy an endurance athlete would use. harry the idea is to, you know, wring out the sponge, i suppose, of the last stage of leaning out in those depletion days, and they would be paired with high volume gym work, and the theory behind it was, apparently, to swell the muscle belly, its not a vascular thing, it was actually just increased overall fullness of the muscle once you ooded it with carbohydrate.
oliver he felt i looked my best, you know, 24 h prior to the competition, so all these little things youve sort of got to take note of and you think, all right, i look this good now, itll be even better tomorrow, and in my case it wasnt, and you think, well, maybe we just do a carb load of two days next time around instead of three, if that works perfectly for that timeframe. oliver water loading 17 so then the water is still going in around about ten litres a day . . .
then the water would start to, the water would start to cut back again as well and that was, sort of, you know, thursday might still be up around about the ten litres, but then friday and saturday, friday might cut down to around about four litres and then saturday was two litres prior to, sort of, two oclock or something like that . . . and then, you know, nothing, yes. luke muscle is 70 water and im not aware of any mechanism that tells the body to go after subcutaneous water.
if youre going to dehydrate, its going to be from everywhere and why are you pulling 70, you know, why are you pulling so much volume out of your muscles because youre really wanting your muscles to be volumised?
will those things dont work for me, ben a terrible, terrible thing to put your body through, luke sodium manipulation 12 so on the monday, tuesday, wednesday would be salt in each meal, with probably around about two grams of salt, a gram, yes, one or two grams of salt with each meal, which was great, but then by wednesday, oh man, youve just had this salty shy chicken meal, its just absolutely disgusting and terrible. and then on the thursday, friday, saturday, the salt would be dropped out.
luke its such a variable which can be really, really . . . completely screw you up . . . like, if you diet for 16 weeks and then the last two days you mess around with your sodium, and then you come on the stage bloated, its such a . . . its such a bummer. kyle post-competition post-competition 15 you kind of work yourself up into a frenzy, ben its not so much hunger, its more so avour.
its more sort of like i want a pizza because i havent had it in months, kyle we eat everything we havent eaten all year, will supplements protein powders 23 i take, obviously, protein powders. i take wpi whey protein isolate just because its, you know, its fast to absorb, or whatever . . . and then obviously, yes, and then obviously casein at night. kyle creatine 15 i dont think ive stopped taking creatine monohydrate since 2004 to be honest.
harry the only thing i ever saw a result from was creatine. my wife would always say, youve started using that creatine again, havent you? id say, why? shed say, oh, youve got that swollen look about you, you know, that volumized look. will glutamine 10 glutamine is ten grams post-training in the off-season. once im in diet mode for comp, especially the last four or ve weeks, i up that to around about 40 g a day.
luke its supposed to help with your immune system and anticatabolic, so being on a lower calorie diet, im trying to stop muscle catabolism and glutamine is supposed to help out. and the last three times that ive dieted, ive, before that, the last four weeks i used to always get sick, always catch a cold or something. the last three times ive dieted, ive upped, had 40 g of glutamine a day for the last four or ve weeks and i havent gotten sick. luke preworkouts 9 and it worked really well.
it was, i was really focused in the gym . . . i just wanted to keep on training. i was just thinking about training, thinking about what i was doing at that time and was getting really into, into that workout. luke im quite sensitive to caffeine by itself and ive had some of those preworkouts and not gotten to sleep until one or two oclock in the morning and thats having had it at 4:30 in the afternoon, ve oclock in the afternoon. so ive actually stayed away from those because of that.
luke sports 2017, 5, 76 6 of 13 table 2. cont. themes subthemes counts of coded text indicative quotes sources of education other bodybuilders 15 hes just been competing for, i dont know, like, a lot of years, so, yes. he kind of, he is the guy who ill run everything by him. if i have an idea, like, should i do this maybe with my, you know, carbs, or whatever, ill run it by him rst and hell give the okay or hell say, maybe just try this.
kyle they might have good body parts and, you know, if you get your legs looking like that or your back looking like that and you see what sport theyve come from or what type of training they do for that body part, but then again, it may just come down to a genetic predisposition for that particular body part. luke internet 15 when i rst got into it, i was not nearly as versed in the, i guess, the empirical evidence kind of way of thinking. i was reading posts online, bodybuilding.com forums.
i was a regular on it. harry just googling, you know, bodybuilding, youll get a . . . you will get some good information but you . . . they dont necessarily know what is good and whats bad. harry the internets going to be everyones rst port of call, kyle the internet is littered with online gurus, oliver it then just comes back to social media, and its the problem what i call the good-looking trainer.
so the most popular ones with the most likes, whatever, lets face it, theyre the good-looking blokes or the good-looking girls, most of which, unfortunately, dont have that much between their ears but they have a huge following because most of their posts theyve got their shirt off or they walk around in a bikini and everyone thinks they look great, so whatever theyre about to tell you must be good, rather than some rough-headed coach whos in his 60s whos done this sort of stuff all his life, oliver hes 17 years old and hes following all these guys on instagram and facebook and things like that, and i dont think they know.
ive told him, mate, hes not natural. sure, have that as an attainable goal in your mind. if you fall short of that, youre still going to be looking great. but i said, be under no illusion that that is natural, so i think a lot of the guys dont know. theyre naive to it, luke science and evidence-based sources 7 i did very quickly gravitate towards more what i perceived to be more science-based and evidence-based approaches rather than just what were the big guys doing.
to me, it was relatively intuitive that some genetic freak on a butt load of steroids and what worked for him would probably not be the same thing as what works for a more or less average bodybuilder who wasnt going to be taking drugs. harry coaches 6 theres not a whole lot of open information and sort of themes its just passed down from coaches in a tradition . . . i suppose i learn the majority of what i do through coaches and colleagues i worked with over time.
keith there are also a lot of 'coaches out there who dont, who are the same as them, you know. most people, they compete in one or two shows and, you know, read a few magazine articles and they think they know how to be a coach. so the average coach is not a . . . the average coach doesnt even have a bachelor degree to be honest. harry sports 2017, 5, 76 7 of 13 3.1. diet 3.1.1.
off-season all participants consumed four to six meals per day, with a targeted energy and macronutrient intake aimed to support muscular hypertrophy, ive got 250 gday protein, and at the moment ill divvy my fats and carbs up, so 250 g protein, 680 g carb and about 100, 110 g on fats, somewhere there, keith. each meal featured a large serving of a high protein food and a large serving of vegetables, in the morning i start off with 100 g of oats and six whole eggs.
thats at around about 7:00 a.m. at 9:30 a.m. will be 200 g of salmon and 200 g of green veg, luke. the off-season diet contained a wide variety of foods, including processed foods such as ice cream, and was less regimented than the in-season. 3.1.2.
in-season while the pattern and style of the diet was similar to the off-season, the in-season intake was more structured, its more structured, its perfect kyle, and usually carefully measured, i will split a grain of rice, if it made it hit exactly the grammage sic i want, keith. serving sizes were also reduced as competition approached. progressive reductions in carbohydrate and fat intake were used to create then maintain an energy decit to elicit fat loss figure 1.
protein intake remained similar to the off-season to prevent loss of lean mass. carbohydrate intake was carefully timed around exercise pre-, during and post-training to ensure training was optimized. figure 1. doughnut chart representation of the stages of bodybuilding preparation, including key dietary strategies used, as reported by seven male, competitive natural bodybuilders participating in in-depth interviews. duration of stages are approximate and vary between bodybuilders.
3.1.3. refeed days refeed days were commonly used during the in-season and primarily aimed to increase energy intake through elevated carbohydrate consumption. participants discussed positive outcomes including increased glycogen stores which aid training performance, mental recovery, and prevention of further adaptive downgrades in energy expenditure, stimulating weight loss. one participant described it as a metabolic jumpstart oliver.
compared to preparations without refeed days, participants discussed consuming more total energy, over a shorter preparation, achieving better fat loss and muscle retention using weekly refeed days. sports 2017, 5, 76 8 of 13 3.1.4. peak week the week prior to the contest was dened as a peak week, where particular short-term strategies were used to achieve the leanest possible appearance.
six participants used a modied carbohydrate loading regimen tapered training and increased carbohydrate intake 7 in order to increase glycogen and theoretically increase muscle volume.
four participants had previously used the classic loading method, which involved a three-day glycogen depletion and then super-compensation 8, however found this did not produce signicant changes in appearance, describing this method as, stressful, ben mentally that would be really bad, kyle and, youre just a wreck luke. all seven participants discussed the practice of water loading and cutting during peak week.
users of this strategy consumed more than 10 l of water per day early in the week, then reduced water intake each day leading into the contest. the rationale for this strategy was to increase uid excretion and to go after subcutaneous water will, which would purportedly provide a leaner, more vascular appearance. results were not effective enough for these participants to warrant continuation of this strategy in subsequent competition preparations.
other participants commented that the idea of water loading and cutting does not make sense physiologically: muscle is about 70 water. if you were dehydrated, the muscles are going to look smaller as well, harry. sodium manipulation was another strategy used during the peak week to reduce body water and produce a leaner appearance.
three participants discussed previously using this strategy, whereby sodium intake was greatly increased for three days, followed by a complete restriction of salt for three days. however, they each reported that the results were inconsistent, and discontinued the strategy. 3.1.5. competition day six participants discussed diet strategies used on the day of competition. two consumed sodium prior to posing on stage to get a greater pump.
small doses of high glycemic index carbohydrates were consumed by two participants. one justied this by saying, that was just to keep you ticking, when youre feeling that depleted, just to keep you propped up, oliver while the other participant commented, thats for sugars, to get the pump kyle. two participants did not change from their usual intake on competition day. 3.1.6.
post-competition participants reported the post-competition diet was more relaxed n 5, and included some treat foods not consumed during the in-season. overindulgence and the experience of feeling physically sick from the change in diet pattern n 2 was reported. weight regain was common and could be substantial 810 kg over three weeks in one case. limited time off dieting was reported by three participants to avoid detrimental physique changes.
participants reported negative changes in physique were common post-competition. 3.2. supplements all participants used one or more dietary supplements. in total, 18 different supplement types were mentioned. creatine 315 gd was used by all participants with doses consumed either pre- or post-workout, with a meal, or a combination of these. protein powders were also used by all participants either as a post-training supplement n 4 or as a source of protein during meals n 4.
preworkout supplements designed to stimulate enhanced training was discussed by four participants, one of which used these for their caffeine content, while the others discontinued use due to side effects insomnia, increased and variable heart rate, and increased respiratory rate. participants reported these experiences were: absolutely horrible ben, i just cant stand it, frankly, will and its counterproductive, so i dont use it will.
other supplements more commonly used were sh oil four participants, glutamine three participants and testosterone boosters three participants. sports 2017, 5, 76 9 of 13 3.3. sources of education the most commonly reported sources of education were the internet, including bodybuilding, strength and conditioning websites and forums n 5, successful bodybuilders n 4, and bodybuilding coaches n 4.
the quality of information available on the internet was considered to be both reputable and non-reputable. concerns were raised by two participants regarding information on social media, where images and information may be unrealistic and deceptive, and potentially damaging for novices. bodybuilding coaches were also commonly used, although one participant commented on the varying levels of coach knowledge, with many relying on their own competition experience.
4. discussion the rationale and use of several key dietary strategies emerged from this study, including regular doses of protein throughout the day to maximize accrual and maintenance of lean mass, and utilizing carbohydrate foods as a fuel source pre-, during and post-exercise. weekly refeed days were implemented during the in-season, to provide both a psychological rest and reportedly assist with fat loss.
during the peak week, bodybuilders followed extreme strategies including water and sodium manipulation in an attempt to achieve the leanest physique. throughout both the off-season and in-season, participants reported consuming large, frequent servings of protein to build and maintain muscle mass, which is empirically supported in the research literature 3.
the optimal dose to achieve this maximal muscle protein synthesis is accepted to be 2030 g of high quality protein 3,9, with studies supporting that protein ingestion above this dose is oxidized 9. recent ndings suggest the amount of muscle mass trained may be a determinant of protein requirements post-exercise. greater myobrillar fractional synthetic rate was achieved with a 40 versus 20 g dose of whey protein following whole-body resistance exercise 10.
therefore, a dose up to 40 g may produce increased protein synthesis following resistance exercise incorporating large amounts of muscle, such as those followed by bodybuilders. the high-protein meals consumed by participants in this study likely exceeded the 2040 g dose for maximal protein synthesis, potentially resulting in increased protein oxidation. however, the anabolic response to protein ingestion is a combination of protein synthesis and breakdown 11.
greater protein net balance has been produced from a 70 g versus 40 g dose of protein, primarily by decreasing the rate of protein breakdown 11. therefore, the frequent, higher-dosed protein meals consumed by bodybuilders may not only assist in supporting protein synthesis, but also in reducing protein degradation during heavy resistance training.
furthermore, protein consumed by participants was primarily a part of a mixed nutrient meal, rather than a pure protein meal typically prescribed in the laboratory setting 3,9,10. carbohydrate and fat consumed in these meals would slow the digestive process, and amino acid delivery to muscle cells. any protein consumed in addition to the optimal 2040 g dose for muscle protein synthesis in these mixed meals may be utilized for anabolic processes over the time course of digestion.
a protein intake of 2.33.1 gkg of fat-free mass has been suggested to be the most protective against losses of lean tissue during energy restriction in lean resistance trained athletes 12. a higher protein requirement may be justied for bodybuilders during competition preparation, as they perform resistance and cardiovascular training, reduce energy intake, and achieve a lean condition 13.
therefore, the higher protein intake during the in-season to prevent loss of muscle mass in these participants may be justied. during the in-season period, carbohydrate consumption was carefully timed around exercise. glycogen is an important fuel substrate during resistance training 14, with glycogen depletion reported to reduce exercise performance 15.
carbohydrate supplementation before and during resistance exercise improves performance of high volume, exhaustive exercise 16,17, a characteristic typical of bodybuilding training 2. during in-season energy restriction, carbohydrate consumption following resistance training would assist in the replenishment of muscle glycogen, facilitating sports 2017, 5, 76 10 of 13 improved recovery and enhanced capacity to maintain training volume and intensity in subsequent sessions 18.
bodybuilders commonly perform multiple training sessions in a single day during the in-season, typically an aerobic and a resistance training session 2, therefore post-exercise carbohydrate ingestion would be important for maintaining training consistency. study participants discussed using a weekly refeed day during the in-season period to boost training performance, provide a mental rest, and assist in body fat reductions.
intermittent energy restriction for weight loss has garnered signicant recent clinical and research interest due to its hypothetical capacity to alleviate metabolic and behavioral adaptations associated with reduced energy intake. these adaptations include increased appetite associated with neuropeptide expression 1921, reduced energy cost of physical activity 22, and hormonal effects that promote fat deposition and loss of lean mass 19,20.
intermittent energy restriction, or metabolic rest periods, have been shown to achieve similar weight and fat loss as continuous energy restriction, despite a higher overall energy intake 21,22. animal studies have shown that acute energy restoration 24 h can attenuate, or even abolish the orexigenic neuropeptide expression resulting from energy restriction 23,24.
the short-term restoration of energy balance, particularly through increased carbohydrate ingestion, would also increase intramuscular glycogen stores allowing greater resistance exercise performance 25. during the peak week, participants discussed the use of several strategies to assist in achieving a lean, vascular appearance. carbohydrate loading, and fluid and sodium manipulation had all been used by participants, with varying success.
only one empirical study has directly assessed changes in muscle girth from carbohydrate loading, finding no significant changes in relaxed or tensed muscle girths following a three-day carbohydrate depletion and subsequent three-day carbohydrate load 26. this suggests carbohydrate loading may not produce the desired increase in muscle volume.
fluid and sodium manipulation to enhance visual appearance has not been empirically studied, however the desired improvement in muscle size and definition may not be obtained. manipulating fluid intake to cause dehydration will result in a loss of fluid from all compartments, not just subcutaneous tissue 27,28. muscle water content is reduced 27, which may reduce muscle volume, an undesirable outcome for a competitive bodybuilder.
additionally, plasma volume is decreased with dehydration 27; the common practice of pumping up prior to posing on stage may be less effective in increasing muscle size due to the detrimental effects of reduced plasma volume on muscle blood ow and volume 13. similarly, the manipulations in sodium consumption will not change the volume of the intracellular or extracellular compartments, only modifying urinary sodium output 29.
in the weeks following competition, participants reported an increased energy intake from a wider variety of foods, often leading to signicant weight regain. daily energy intake in the rst two days post-competition was approximately twice that of the four weeks pre-competition in female bodybuilders, with an increase in body mass of 3.9 kg in the three weeks after competition 30.
similarly, an average weight regain of 5.9 kg was reported in a group of male bodybuilders, with 46 of these participants reporting binge-eating episodes in the days immediately following competing 31. supplement use, predominantly creatine and protein powders, was common amongst the bodybuilders interviewed, while pre-workout formulas had been trialled, with unwanted side effects commonly reported.
protein and creatine supplementation have been demonstrated to be effective for increasing lean mass and strength 32,33. the efcacy of so-called pre-workout supplements is yet to be conrmed. these products contain a combination of key ingredients such as creatine, caffeine, arginine, -alanine and selected plant extracts 13,34,35. efcacy would be dependent on the supplement ingredients, and some produce side effects such as acute increases in blood pressure and difculty sleeping 34.
bodybuilders have historically relied on magazines, other successful competitors, and more recently the internet, for information on dietary strategies 1. this study identied the internet, in particular bodybuilding and strength and conditioning websites and forums, as a primary source of education, as well as other bodybuilders and coaches.
in addition to the internet 36, athletes have previously identied family members, other athletes, coaches and registered dietitians as important sports 2017, 5, 76 11 of 13 sources of information regarding nutrition and dietary supplements 3739. dietitians were not identied as sources of information by participants in this study, suggesting that their role needs better promotion amongst bodybuilders.
with skills in dietary assessment, planning and body composition measurement, as well as evidence-based strategies demonstrated to assist in the accrual of lean mass, dietitians have much expertise to provide bodybuilders, particularly novices who were considered by participants in this study to be vulnerable to inappropriate strategies promoted on the internet. study limitations include use of a small, homogeneous sample.
experienced bodybuilders were purposively sampled, therefore these results may not reect the wider bodybuilding population, particularly inexperienced bodybuilders. 5. conclusions despite the common perception that bodybuilders follow extreme, unproven methods, the experienced bodybuilders in this study reported predominantly using dietary strategies recognized as evidence-based.
however, inexperienced bodybuilders may be vulnerable to more extreme strategies based on advice widely disseminated on the internet and social media. novel strategies identied in this study warrant further investigation. intermittent energy restriction, and hormonal responses associated with short-term energy restoration, should be studied to determine benets for weight loss whilst maintaining lean mass in both lean-athletic and obese populations.
peak week strategies implemented by bodybuilders, such as uid and sodium manipulation, require further investigation to determine their efcacy and safety. acknowledgments: this work was supported by the sports dietitians australia. author contributions: l.m. was involved in study design, data collection, analysis, writing. d.h. was involved in study design, data collection, writing. j.g. was involved in study design, analysis, writing. f.e. was involved in analysis, writing.
h.o.c. was involved in study design, data collection, writing. conicts of interest: the authors declare no conicts of interest. h.o.c. receives payments from sports dietitians australia for professional presentations delivered in a continuing education course for sports dietitians.
 sports review nutrition recommendations for bodybuilders in the o-season: a narrative review juma iraki 1,, peter fitschen 2, sergio espinar 1 and eric helms 3 1 iraki nutrition as, 2008 fjerdingby, norway 2 fitbody and physique llc, stevens point, wi 54481, usa 3 sport performance research institute new zealand sprinz at aut millennium, auckland university of technology, auckland 0632, new zealand correspondence: jumairakinutrition.com; tel.:
47-47-44-36-44 received: 20 may 2019; accepted: 24 june 2019; published: 26 june 2019 abstract: many nutrition practices often used by bodybuilders lack scientic support and can be detrimental to health. recommendations during the dieting phase are provided in the scientic literature, but little attention has been devoted to bodybuilders during the o-season phase. during the o-season phase, the goal is to increase muscle mass without adding unnecessary body fat.
this review evaluated the scientic literature and provides nutrition and dietary supplement recommendations for natural bodybuilders during the o-season phase. a hyper-energetic diet 1020 should be consumed with a target weight gain of 0.250.5 of bodyweightweek for noviceintermediate bodybuilders. advanced bodybuilders should be more conservative with the caloric surplus and weekly weight gain.
sucient protein 1.62.2 gkgday should be consumed with optimal amounts 0.400.55 gkg per meal and distributed evenly throughout the day 36 meals including within 12 hours pre- and post-training. fat should be consumed in moderate amounts 0.51.5 gkgday. remaining calories should come from carbohydrates with focus on consuming sucient amounts 35 gkgday to support energy demands from resistance exercise.
creatine monohydrate 35 gday, caeine 56 mgkg, beta-alanine 35 gday and citrulline malate 8 gday might yield ergogenic eects that can be benecial for bodybuilders. keywords: bodybuilding; nutrition; muscle hypertrophy 1. introduction bodybuilding is more than a sport; it is an art and culture. it dierentiates itself from performance sports as the athletes are judged on appearance rather than athletic ability on competition day.
bodybuilders pose onstage where they are judged on muscularity, denition, and symmetry. during a season, bodybuilders go through three dierent phases: muscle-gaining phase o-season, dieting for competition contest preparation and the competition itself. most of the literature surrounds the dieting phase 1. however, the scientic literature on dietary recommendations for bodybuilders in the o-season is lacking.
this is an important gap, as most of a bodybuilders career is spent in this phase where the goal is to increase muscle mass while minimizing excess increases in fat mass. bodybuilders are known for having rigid attitudes toward food selection, meal frequency, nutrition timing and supplementation 2.
historically, information about nutrition and supplementation has been passed on by bodybuilding magazines and successful competitors, but recently more information has emerged via the internet and forums 3,4. as such, many of the dietary strategies used by bodybuilders do not have sound scientic support and there is evidence in the scientic literature that a number of these strategies, including the heavy use of dietary supplements, can be detrimental to health 57.
sports 2019, 7, 154; doi:10.3390sports7070154 www.mdpi.comjournalsports sports 2019, 7, 154 2 of 19 since bodybuilders spend most of their time in the o-season, there is a clear need for safe and evidence-based nutrition and dietary supplement recommendations for this population. there is also evidence that some bodybuilders, especially high-level competitors in natural bodybuilding, may be interested in evidence-based information 8.
the purpose of this review is to evaluate the scientic literature on topics related to nutrition and dietary supplementation relevant for bodybuilders in the o-season and provide practical recommendations for energy intake, macronutrients, meal frequency, nutrient timing and dietary supplements.
2. energy during the o-season, the main goal of a bodybuilder is to increase muscle mass while minimizing increases in fat mass through the use of resistance training and maintaining a positive energy balance. in order to accurately assess energy requirements for bodybuilders during the o-season, training volume, frequency and intensity must be considered.
during the o-season phase, it has been reported that bodybuilders resistance train 56 times a week, exercising each muscle group 12 times weekly 9. it was also reported that they follow a high-volume training routine with 45 exercises per muscle group, performing 36 sets per exercise, 712 repetition maximum rm for each set with 12 min rest between sets. training session duration was reported as 4090 min. however, training plans can dier greatly from athlete to athlete.
the average calorie intake of bodybuilders must also be evaluated. in the o-season, energy intake is usually substantially higher compared to the dieting phase with dietary intakes among male bodybuilders being reported at an average intake of 3800 kcalday during the o-season and 2400 kcalday during the dieting phase 2. due to the limited information available on nutritional strategies during the o-season phase, this review will discuss optimizing strategies during this phase.
however, readers are encouraged to read the review by helms and colleagues on the dieting phase which also covers recommendations for macronutrients, meal frequency and nutrient timing as well as dietary supplements 1. positive energy balance positive energy balance has been shown to have an important anabolic eect, even in the absence of resistance training 10.
however, combining a positive energy balance with resistance training provides the most eective method to ensure the anabolic eects are directed toward increasing skeletal muscle mass 11,12. the ideal size of the energy surplus to gain lean mass while limiting the accumulation of adipose tissue may dier based upon training status.
in untrained subjects, a substantial energy surplus of 2000 kcal combined with resistance training has been shown to provide robust weight gain where the contribution from lean body mass lbm can be as high as 100 12. however, in trained subjects, substantial energy surpluses might not be necessary or benecial.
one study conducted on elite athletes looked at the eect of dietary guidance on body composition changes among elite athletes when resistance training was combined with dierent energy surplus magnitudes. one group with an average bodyweight of 75 kg, consumed energy ad libitum 2964 kcal to reach a very small surplus, while a second group with an average body weight of 71 kg received dietary counseling and consumed 600 kcal more than the ad libitum group 13.
both groups followed the same 4-days per week resistance training program over a period of 812 weeks. the researchers hypothesized that the hyper-energetic group would have greater gains in body weight and lbm. although the hyper-energetic group achieved greater increases in lbm compared to those eating ad libitum, this failed to reach statistical signicance 1.7 kg vs. 1.2 kg, respectively.
further, compared to the ad libitum group they had signicantly larger increases in fat mass 1.1 kg vs. 0.2 kg, respectively. the researchers concluded that a 200300 kcal per day surplus in highly trained athletes might be more appropriate than 500 kcal to minimize the risk of unnecessary increases in body fat. untrained subjects, further from their genetic ceiling of muscle mass, may be able to gain muscle at a faster rate compared to trained individuals.
sports 2019, 7, 154 3 of 19 rates of muscle growth may slow as an individual becomes more advanced 14. thus, larger energy surpluses may be more benecial for novice bodybuilders, while advanced bodybuilders might benet more from conservative hyper-energetic diets to limit unnecessary increases in body fat. previous studies have recommended bodybuilders to consume a slightly hyper-energetic diet with a 15 increase in energy intake above maintenance in the o-season 15.
however, this does not take into consideration the training history and experience level of the individual bodybuilder. because the ability to gain muscle mass is limited, an aggressive surplus can result in an unnecessary gain of body fat, which would increase the duration or the severity of subsequent contest prep periods, consequentially increasing the duration or severity of low energy availability.
thus, the number of calories a bodybuilder consumes above maintenance may need to be set based on experience level, then adjusted based on rate of weight gain and changes in body composition. given that bodybuilders often experience rapid weight gain after a competition, it might be benecial to have a target for weight gain per week and adjust accordingly 16,17.
however, initially post competition, a faster weight gain to help restore a competitor to a healthy status both psychologically and physiologically might be benecial before the rate of weight gain is slowed to limit excessive accumulation of adipose tissue. in the scientic literature, it has been recommended to aim for a target weight gain of 0.250.5 kg per week when trying to increase lbm and minimize gains in fat mass 14,18.
for the advanced bodybuilder, a potential 2 kg increase in body weight on a monthly basis might be too excessive and result in unnecessary accrual of body fat; thus, this rate should be considered with caution.
based on the current evidence, it may be appropriate to recommend bodybuilders to consume a slightly hyper-energetic diet 1020 above maintenance calories in the o-season and recommend advanced bodybuilders to aim for the lower end of this recommendation, or even be more conservative if substantial increases in fat mass are experienced. given that bodybuilders on average consume 45 kcalkg during the o-season, the recommended surplus would equate to approximately 4248 kcalkg 2.
aiming for a target weight gain of 0.250.5 of bodyweight per week might be useful, while also adjusting energy intake based on changes in body composition. in addition, it may be more appropriate to look at average weekly weight changes based on daily or multiple times per week weigh ins to limit the errors of daily uctuations of weight that may occur during the week. once caloric surplus is determined, the next step would be to distribute the calories between protein, fats and carbohydrates.
3. protein skeletal muscle protein turnover is the relationship between muscle protein synthesis mps and muscle protein breakdown mpb. skeletal muscle hypertrophy requires a net balance where mps exceeds mpb. resistance exercise provides the initiating tension stimulus that drives hypertrophy resulting from cumulative increases in mps after chronic resistance exercise 19; however, increases in fat free mass ffm can be limited if an insucient daily protein intake is consumed 20.
in addition to the total amount consumed per day, researchers have speculated that the quality of protein may augment resistance training-induced muscle gain 21. thus, both of these topics will be discussed in the following sections. 3.1. daily intake while the current rda for protein in healthy individuals is 0.8 gkg, twice this amount was observed to maximize resistance training-induced hypertrophy in a 2018 meta-analysis by morton and colleagues 22.
furthermore, the authors noted it may be prudent to recommend 2.2 g proteinkgd for those seeking to maximize resistance training-induced gains in ffm, as 2.2 gkg was the upper end of the condence limit 22 and individual dierences dictate that some athletes will have higher protein needs than others 23. additionally, a better safe than sorry recommendation is likely safe given the lack of apparent harm over 12 year trials among lifters consuming protein intakes of at least 2.2 gkg 24,25.
finally, the mean and upper 95 condence limit for protein requirements using sports 2019, 7, 154 4 of 19 the indicator amino acid oxidation technique among male bodybuilders on non-training days, were reported as 1.7 and 2.2 gkg 26, respectivelywhich is similar to the requirement among women when normalized to ffm 27.
however, bodybuilders have been reported to consume up to 4.3 gkg of protein per day among males, and 2.8 gkg among females which far exceeds these recommendations 2. guidelines previously given for bodybuilders in the o-season, were to consume 2530 of their energy intake from protein 15.
it might be reasonable to argue against giving recommendations based on percentages of total energy intake, due to the fact that a light individual with high energy requirements might end up consuming protein which far exceeds what is necessary and required. further, this can also lead to insucient intakes of carbohydrates and fats if an athlete is targeting a specic caloric intake. thus, recommending protein requirements based on body weight might be more appropriate.
therefore, bodybuilders should consume a minimum of 1.6 gkg of protein in the oseason, although targeting closer to 2.2 gkg may ensure a more consistently optimized response across a greater proportion of athletes. finally, among bodybuilders who struggle with oseason hunger and subsequently consume energy intakes that lead to faster rates of weight gain and excess fat accumulation, a higher protein intake may be useful if not contraindicated for clinical reasons.
in a study by antonio and colleagues, resistance trained participants consuming more protein 4.4 gkg per day and more calories gained a similar amount of ffm, but did not gain additional body fat compared to a lower protein group consuming fewer calories 28. likewise, in a follow up study, a group consuming 3.4 gkg of protein daily gained a similar amount of ffm, but lost a greater proportion of body fat compared to a lower protein group, once again, despite a higher energy intake 29.
the authors of these free living studies speculated their ndings were due to increases in dietary induced thermogenesis via the very high protein diets. however, this is at odds with a more tightly controlled 2012 metabolic ward study by bray and colleagues in which the protein content of the diet inuenced the proportion of ffm gained, while total body mass was dictated by the diets energy content alone 30.
thus, while dietary induced thermogenesis may indeed be meaningfully higher with protein intakes in the 3 gkg or higher range, the fat loss or lack of weight gain observed by antonio and colleagues, despite a reported higher energy intake, might also reect the satiating eect of very high protein intakes decreasing actual energy intake, rather than an increase in thermogenesis alone.
3.2. protein quality essential amino acids eaa are the only amino acids required to stimulate the process of mps 31. while all amino acids provide the necessary building blocks for the synthesis of new tissue, the amino acid leucine in particular appears to be especially important as a metabolic trigger of mps 32. a sucient concentration of leucine has been suggested to be necessary to reach a leucine threshold which is required to maximally stimulate mps 33.
in short, from a muscle building perspective, protein sources that both trigger a robust mps response sucient leucine quantity and provide the essential building blocks for the construction of new muscle tissue contain the full spectrum of essential amino acids in abundance can be seen as higher quality. while the mechanistic eect of leucine on mps is beyond the scope of this publication, readers are encouraged to read a review that covers this topic in detail 34.
in general, on a gram per gram basis, animal-based protein sources typically contain more leucine and eaa, although there are notable exceptions. soy protein, one of the most common plant-based protein supplements, has all the eaa, but in a lower amount per gram compared to dairy protein and thus, in one study produced a smaller increase in mps compared to whey after acute ingestion 35.
interestingly, in this same study soy produced a larger increase in mps than casein, also a high quality dairy protein, presumably due to the slower digestion speed of casein 35. meaning, while the leucine and eaa content of a protein source certainly should be considered, the acute mps response is not the only variable linked to long term hypertrophy. indeed, a high-quality but slow protein like casein produces a smaller amplitude sports 2019, 7, 154 5 of 19 mps response initially.
however, casein and other slowly digested proteins may produce a similar or larger mps area under the curve when viewed longitudinally compared to a fast protein source like whey, which results in a larger initial increase and then a steep reduction 36. more importantly, the acute mps response to a given type of protein should not be viewed from a reductionist perspective.
in the real world, multiple servings of various protein sources are consumed daily, likely making some of these distinctions in amino acid prole and digestion kinetics moot. indeed, in a meta-analysis comparing longitudinal body composition changes with dierent types of protein supplements, there were no signicant dierences among participants consuming soy when compared to whey, other dairy proteins, or beef protein isolate 37.
as demonstrated in a study comparing groups consuming post-training protein on top of a diet already consisting of 25 protein, whether 48 g of whey containing 5.5 g of leucine was provided, or 48 g of rice protein containing 3.8 g of leucine was provided, no impact was observed on body composition changes between groups after eight weeks 38.
therefore, when consumed in sucient quantities especially considering total daily protein intake the protein quality of an individual meal is of less concern. even so, if one was to consume a diet dominated by plant-based protein sources, there are alternatives to soy and rice. for example, pea protein isolate is rich in both eaa and leucine.
in a 12-week study, a group consuming 50 g of pea protein isolate daily had greater increases in resistance-training induced muscle thickness compared to placebo, which were not signicantly dierent from a group consuming 50 g of whey 39. therefore, in the context of the recommendations in this article, protein quality may only be a concern if using the low-end range of the protein guidelines 1.6 gkg, or if consuming a largely plant based diet.
in either case, it might prove benecial to supplement with leucine and eaa rich sources of proteinas appropriate based on dietary preference e.g., dairy proteins or pea protein if veganto ensure the expected mps response to ones protein intake occurs. 4. fats fat is an essential nutrient vital for many functions in the body. however, less is known about the eect of dietary fat in regard to skeletal muscle hypertrophy.
intakes of dietary fat among bodybuilders have been reported to range from 833 of total calories 2. although intramuscular triglycerides can act as a fuel source during resistance training, they are not a limiting factor since substrates are derived primarily from anaerobic processes 40.
of interest to the bodybuilder, there is evidence in endurance athletes 41 and hockey players 42 that low carbohydrate diets 3045 of energy or lower may aect the free testosterone to cortisol ftc ratio, which could have a negative impact on recovery. on the other hand, reducing dietary fat in isocaloric diets from 3040 to 1525 has resulted in signicant but modest reductions in testosterone levels 4346.
however, it is not clear that testosterone changes within normal ranges aect muscle gain signicantly 47. despite the possibility that testosterone levels may be higher when consuming a greater proportion of energy from dietary fat, actual changes in muscle mass during longitudinal studies of resistance trained individuals following high fat, ketogenic diets have consistently been inferior to moderate or lower fat approaches with ample carbohydrate 4851.
whether this is due to changes in exercise capacity, or alterations in ftc ratio, or some other mechanism related to the high fat or low carbohydrate component of the diet is yet to be elucidated. however, this indicates that perhaps a more moderate proportion of dietary fat should be consumed, rather than a low or high intake. in the literature, recommendations of 1520 and 2030 of calories from dietary fat have been proposed 15,52.
however, further research is needed to establish the eect and optimal amount of dietary fat for aiding muscle hypertrophy. based on current evidence, it may be prudent to recommend that dietary fats should account for 2035 of caloriesconforming to the american college of sports medicine recommendations for athletes 53which under most circumstances would equate to approximately 0.51.5 gkgday.
sports 2019, 7, 154 6 of 19 further, it should be noted that sucient intakes of dietary protein and carbohydrates should not be compromised by a high dietary fat intake. fat quality such as omega 3 and omega 6 might also be of importance for bodybuilders. provided sucient intake from a high-quality diet containing good sources of these fatty acids, they do not need to be supplemented. however, it might be challenging for some to consume the optimal amounts.
thus, this will be discussed in further detail in the dietary supplements section. 5. carbohydrates unlike proteins and fats, carbohydrates are considered non-essential for the human diet because the body has the ability to produce glucose needed by tissues through gluconeogenesis 54. however, carbohydrate intake has an important role in the bodybuilders diet as a regulator of thyroid hormones and as a contributor to micronutrient needs 55,56.
further, a very low carb diet could limit regeneration of adenosine triphosphate atp and limit the muscles ability to contract with high force 57,58. during high intensity exercise, muscle-glycogen is the major contributor of substrate and it has been shown that glycolysis provides 80 of atp demand from one set of elbow exion when taken to muscular failure 59.
in spite of this, part of the glycogen used during this type of exercise can be resynthesized from lactate, which could reduce the carbohydrate requirement. resistance training has also been shown to reduce muscle-glycogen by 2440 in a single session 59,60. the depleted amount may vary based on duration, intensity and the work completed, but typical bodybuilding training with higher repetition and moderate loads seems to cause the greatest reduction of muscle-glycogen stores 61.
further, it has been suggested that when glycogen stores are too low 70 mmolkg, this may inhibit the release of calcium and hasten the onset of muscle fatigue 62. low muscle glycogen signicantly reduces the number of repetitions performed when three sets of squats at 80 1 rm are performed 57.
however, it has been shown that consuming a diet containing 7.7 gkgday of carbohydrate for 48 hours before a training session has no greater eect on performance compared to 0.37 gkgday when 15 sets of 15 rm lower-body exercise is performed 63. similarly, another study found that a 70 carbohydrate diet compared to 50 carbohydrate diet had no greater eect on performance during supramaximal exercise; however, a diet consisting of 25 carbohydrates signicantly reduced performance 64.
further, given the observed long term negative eects on muscle mass recently observed in trials of resistance-trained populations following ketogenic diets 49,51, it might be prudent for bodybuilders to simply ensure a sucient intake of carbohydrates given these disparate results. thus, while both moderate and high carbohydrate diets are likely appropriate for bodybuilding, very low carbohydrate diets may be detrimental to training.
in male bodybuilders, average carbohydrate intakes of 5.3 gkgday have been reported during the o-season 2. however, optimal amounts of carbohydrates have not been established for bodybuilders. in the literature, recommendations for strength sports, which includes bodybuilding, intakes of 47 gkgday and 56 gkg have been proposed 15,65. carbohydrate seems to be important for the bodybuilder, but only moderate amounts may be required to yield benets.
therefore, after calories have been devoted to protein 1.62.2 gkgday and fats 0.51.5 gkgday, the remaining calories should be allotted to carbohydrates. however, based on current evidence, it might be reasonable to consume sucient amounts of carbohydrates in the 35 gkgday range if possible. further research is warranted among bodybuilders to conclude if habitually higher or lower carbohydrate intakes than have been observed might yield further benets.
table 1 summarizes the recommendations for calories and macronutrients. sports 2019, 7, 154 7 of 19 table 1. dietary recommendation for bodybuilders in the o-season. diet component recommendation noviceintermediate recommendation advanced weekly weight gain 0.250.5 of body weight 0.25 of body weight calories 1020 above maintenance 510 above maintenance protein 1.62.2 gkg 1.62.2 gkg fats 0.51.5 gkg 0.51.5 gkg carbohydrates remaining calories 35 gkg remaining calories 35 gkg 6.
nutrient distribution and timing bodybuilders are reported to have a mean intake of six meals a day 66; however, there are no studies looking specically at what might be an optimal meal frequency for this population 65. this high frequency of meals is based on the belief of a greater state of anabolism and even a better use of nutrients during the day, which could translate into an improvement in body composition.
the concept of timing protein intake to maximize hypertrophy spans a number of dosing strategies. the rst to appear in the literature was the consumption of protein in close proximity to resistance training. peak mps rates are higher in this period when protein is consumed; thus, this strategy is proposed to improve the eciency of skeletal muscle repair and remodeling 31.
additionally, due to the muscle full eect, whereby further provision of protein fails to increase mps until sucient time has passed, evenly spreading protein intake between multiple meals is another strategy designed to maximize total daily mps 67. finally, pre-bed consumption of slow-digesting protein such as casein to prevent extended catabolic periods during sleep is the most recently proposed strategy to improve net daily protein balance 68.
each of these three strategies will be discussed in turn. 6.1. protein dosage the post-training period permits a higher mps peak when protein is consumed 31 and to reach peak mps, an adequate threshold leucine dose may be needed 32. several studies have examined the protein dosage required to maximize mps after training 6971. in one, 0, 5, 10, 20 or 40 g of whole egg protein was consumed following lower-body resistance exercise with 20 g maximally stimulating mps 69.
similar results were also seen in another study, where 20 g whey was sucient to maximally stimulate post-absorptive rates of mps both at rest and after unilateral leg work at 80 of 1 rm 70. further, 40 g of whey produced no additional increases of mps in this study and lead to oxidation and urea production. however, a recent study found that when performing whole-body resistance exercise at 75 of 1 rm, 40 g of whey produced a signicantly higher mps response compared to 20 g 71.
therefore, there is a relationship between the volume of muscle tissue that is damaged and stimulated, and the appropriate intake of protein.
interestingly, authors of a 2013 meta-analysis noted that despite short term tracer studies showing greater mps responses when protein was consumed in the window of opportunity post-training, in longitudinal training studies no signicant eect on hypertrophy was found when controlling for total daily protein intake regardless of whether protein was consumed within the window, or outside it 72. 6.2.
nutrient timing similarly, researchers in a short term tracer study investigating protein dosing over the course of 12 hours reported a greater mps area under the curve when four 20 g whey protein doses were consumed every three hours compared to two 40 g doses six hours apart and eight 10 g doses every hour and a half 73.
in theory, given the threshold past which additional protein consumed in a single sitting does not further contribute to mps 69, and due to the post-prandial refractory period during sports 2019, 7, 154 8 of 19 which mps cannot be maximally stimulated again 67, one would conclude that a bodybuilder should reachbut not exceedthis threshold dose every few hours to maximize long term hypertrophy.
however, authors of a 2018 systematic review on protein supplements including 34 randomized controlled trials, reported similar lean mass gains among groups using a with-meal resulting in fewer protein servings of a high magnitude and between-meal resulting in more protein servings of a moderate magnitude dosing schedule 74. intriguingly, data examining night-time protein feedings display a similar disconnect between short term mechanistic studies and long-term training interventions.
in 2012, the rst research examining the acute response to night-time casein feeding was carried out 68. in it, the authors reported 40 g of casein consumed before bed was digested, absorbed, and stimulated mps and improved whole-body protein balance during the overnight period to a greater degree than placebo. additional acute studies were published in the years following which conrmed 75 and also reconrmed these ndings in an older population 76.
in 2015, authors of the rst longitudinal study reported enhanced strength and hypertrophy in a night-time protein-supplemented group compared to a placebo group 77. however, total daily protein was not matched, as the night-time protein group consumed 1.9 gkgday while the placebo group only consumed 1.3 gkg.
importantly, in both of the only protein matched longitudinal studies comparing night-time casein supplementation to earlier-supplemented groups, no signicant dierences in ffm gains were reported between groups 78,79. thus, the question is the same for each distribution strategy, why are there repeated disconnects between short term mechanistic studies of mps and long-term research examining actual hypertrophy?
the answer may lie in the methods used in mps studies as participants are fasted, provided only protein powder in isolation, often given whey which is digested very quickly and observed for short periods. these lab settings result in dierent digestion time courses and amino acid kinetics than occur in the real world. specically, in these lab conditions baseline levels of amino acids in the body are lower than normal, and digestion and subsequent delivery of amino acids to muscle is faster.
in free-living conditions, protein is consumed primarily from whole food sources, multiple times per day, and in conjunction with other foods, all of which delays gastric emptying. for these reasons, amino acids are titrated into the bloodstream in a slower, more consistent manner; thus, there is almost always a readily available supply under normal conditions 80. therefore, the eectiveness of the anabolic window and even protein distribution strategies might not translate to practice.
additionally, lab-specic limitations extend to night-time feeding studies as well. consider for example, that 26 g of protein from lean steak results in a sustained elevation in mps lasting at least six hours the entire time period studied 81. furthermore, 26 g is only 37 the protein dose contained on average in an american dinner 82, which would take longer to digest due to the larger serving of protein, and the addition of ber, lipids and other nutrients which would further delay digestion 80.
therefore, the typical nal meal may already full the intended purpose of a casein shake. with that said, despite these disconnects between mps and body composition outcomes, there is certainly no harm from attempting these strategies, especially if implemented in a pragmatic manner that doesnt introduce additional logistical strain on ones daily schedule.
therefore, it might be prudent to recommend bodybuilders to divide their daily intake of 1.62.2 gkg of protein per day into multiple meals each containing 0.400.55 gkg 80 and ensure that one of these meals occurs within 12 hours before or after training, and one feeding consisting of a non-whey protein source is consumed 12 hours prior to sleep.
for example, a 90 kg bodybuilder might consume 4050 g of protein at 89 am for breakfast, train at 11 am, have 4050 g of protein at 121 pm for lunchpost-training, 4050 g of protein at dinner between 56 pm, and then a nal meal of 4050 g of non-whey protein at 910 pm before heading to bed by 11 pm. carbohydrates consumed peri-workout is often a strategy utilized by athletes to improve performance in high intensity exercises.
complete glycogen resynthesis can be achieved within 24 hours sports 2019, 7, 154 9 of 19 following a glycogen depleting training bout if sucient amounts of carbohydrate are consumed 83. however, only 2440 of muscle glycogen is depleted following resistance exercise 59,60. therefore, an amount of 35 gkg carbohydrates per day would most likely be enough for glycogen resynthesis.
this high daily carbohydrate intake likely also reduces the impact of pre-workout carbohydrate timing on exercise performance. consuming carbohydrates with protein post-workout is often claimed to have a an anabolic eect due to the secretion of insulin. although insulin has been shown to have anabolic eects 84, at physiological levels its release has little impact on post-exercise anabolism 85.
further, several studies have shown no further eects on muscle protein synthesis post-exercise when carbohydrates are combined with amino acids 86,87. in addition to bodybuilders lacking the need to emphasize glycogen replenishment, protein enhances post workout mps to maximal levels even without the addition of carbohydrate 86,87. while there is certainly no harm in post-workout carbohydrate consumption, doing so is unlikely to enhance long term hypertrophy as discussed in prior reviews 1,88.
therefore, it may be best to focus on consumption of adequate daily carbohydrate and base carbohydrate distribution around the workout on personal preference. 7. dietary supplements in a recent survey among bodybuilders, it was reported that all of the participants were taking dietary supplements 9. the most common dietary supplements were: protein supplements 86, creatine 68, branched chain amino acids 67, glutamine 42, vitamins 40, sh oil 37 and caeineephedrine containing products 24.
although protein supplements are popular among bodybuilders, they are predominantly used in the same way as whole foods to reach protein targets. therefore, they will not be discussed in further detail. readers are encouraged to read the issn position stance on this topic 89. further, covering all supplements commonly used by bodybuilders is beyond the scope of this review.
rather, the focus will be on dietary supplements that might potentially yield an ergogenic eect and supplements that can insure sucient intake of micronutrients and essential fatty acids. 7.1. creatine monohydrate creatine phosphate is found in high concentrations in skeletal and cardiac muscle where it acts as an energy source 90. creatine can also be obtained through the diet in individuals who consume meat; however, creatine concentrations in meat are reduced with cooking 91.
numerous studies have observed increases in muscle mass and strength following creatine loading phases typically of 20 g daily for around 1 week oftentimes followed by maintenance phases of 23 g creatine daily 92. however, the loading phase may not be necessary. muscle creatine saturation following 3 g creatine monohydrate supplementation for 28 days was shown to be similar to creatine monohydrate consumption following the typical loading phase 93.
most individuals do not reach 3 g daily through the diet and supplementation may be necessary. there are numerous forms of creatine in supplements on the market of which creatine monohydrate is the most studied. newer versions of creatine such as kre-alkalyn 94 and creatine ethyl-ester 95 have not been shown to be superior to creatine monohydrate despite typically having a higher price point. therefore, we recommend consumption of 3 g creatine monohydrate daily.
timing of creatine does not seem to matter as saturation of creatine phosphate stores takes approximately 28 days to reach maximum concentrations when 3 gday is consumed and does not have an acute eect 93. 7.2. caeine one of the most used dietary supplements among bodybuilders are stimulants, in particular caeine 9. in addition to increasing arousal 96, caeine can reduce pain and perceived exertion during exercise 97 and improves calcium handling which may increase power output 98.
studies on sports 2019, 7, 154 10 of 19 resistance exercise have found that caeine reduces fatigue and increases strength 99,100. however, not all studies have shown an ergogenic eect on resistance exercise 101. studies that have shown an ergogenic eect have used high dosages of caeine 56 mgkg which is at the upper limit of what is considered a safe dosage 99,100. however, it may be advisable to consume the minimum eective dosage for an individual as tolerance can arise from regular intake 102.
due to the acute eect of caeine, it is advisable to consume caeine approximately 1 hour before exercise 99. however, the half-life of caeine is roughly 39 hours; therefore, it may be advisable to consume caeine earlier in the day to support healthy sleep patterns if exercise is performed later in the day 103.
further research is warranted for a consensus on the use of caeine regarding resistance exercise but based upon the current evidence a dosage of 56 mgkg consumed pre-exercise might yield an ergogenic eect on resistance exercise performance. 7.3. beta-alanine ingestion of 46 g beta-alanine has been shown to elevate muscle carnosine levels 104. carnosine acts as a ph buer in skeletal muscle and may delay the onset of muscle fatigue during high-intensity exercise 105.
a meta-analysis concluded that beta-alanine might yield ergogenic eects during high-intensity exercise lasting 60240 seconds 104. further, there were no benecial eects in exercise lasting 60 seconds. most of the studies included in the meta-analysis looked at endurance exercise. however, there is evidence that beta-alanine supplementation may improve muscular endurance in resistance-trained athletes 105 and may improve body composition 106.
further studies are warranted to examine the ergogenic eect of beta-alanine on body composition and performance. however, given that bodybuilders often train with more than 10 repetitions per set and often times include intensity techniques such as drop sets, rest pauses, myo reps and others, beta alanine might yield a benet in the endurance of these sets 9.
thus, it might be reasonable for a bodybuilder to consume 35 g beta alanine daily during high repetition training phases or training phases where they are incorporating several intensity techniques that prolong the duration of a set. similar to creatine monohydrate, beta-alanine does not have an acute eect as muscle carnosine concentrations takes approximately 4 weeks to reach concentrations that would yield an ergogenic eect, provided that sucient amounts are consumed daily 104.
7.4. citrulline malate recently, citrulline malate has gained popularity among bodybuilders. the potential ergogenic eect is thought to be increased atp production and citrulline malates potential ability to act as a buering agent 107. consumption of 8 g citrulline malate has been shown to increase repetitions to failure by as much as 50 percent 107110, decrease muscle soreness by 40 percent 107 and improve maximal strength and anaerobic power 111.
however, not all studies have observed ergogenic eects of citrulline malate consumption. two recent studies failed to show improvement in performance, augment the muscle swelling response to training, alleviate fatigue or increase focus and energy following citrulline malate supplement in recreational resistance trained men 112,113. a recent meta-analysis by trexler et al. analyzed 12 studies on cm for strength and power performance 114.
although they only found a small eect size 0.20, they concluded that this might be relevant for high level athletes where competition outcomes are decided on small margins, such as high level competitive bodybuilders. it is advised to consume citrulline malate approximately 60 min before exercise to allow for sucient absorption. further research is warranted to determine the ecacy of citrulline malate for resistance exercise.
at this stage, the data indicates either a benecial or neutral eect on performance. thus, based on current evidence, 8 gday of citrulline malate consumed pre-exercise might have some benets that are of interest to bodybuilders. sports 2019, 7, 154 11 of 19 7.5. multivitaminmineral historically, bodybuilders have utilized restrictive diets that eliminate foods or entire food groups. as a result, numerous vitamin and mineral deciencies are common.
in dieting bodybuilders, deciencies including calcium, vitamin d, zinc, iron and others have been observed 115117. however, a majority of literature on dietary practices of bodybuilders is from the 1980s and 1990s; therefore, more recent data is needed 2. more recently, dieting practices in bodybuilders who use a traditional restrictive diet were compared to competitors using a macronutrient-based dieting approach where no food or food group was olimits 118.
not surprisingly, competitors using a more exible dieting approach were found to have fewer micronutrient deciencies. specically, vitamin e, vitamin k, and protein were found to be signicantly lower in women utilizing strict dietary approaches compared to those using more exible approaches. in the current review, we recommend using a exible dieting approach where no food or group is eliminated from the diet.
thereby, micronutrient deciencies are less likely to occur, especially considering that competitors in the oseason have a greater caloric allotment than those dieting for a show which should allow them to incorporate a greater variety of foods. nevertheless, it may be advisable to recommend a low dose multivitaminmineral supplement 100 rda as a failsafe to prevent any major micronutrient deciencies while also emphasizing consumption of a variety of foods daily to meet micronutrient needs.
7.6. omega 3 polyunsaturated fatty acids with a double bond three atoms away from their terminal methyl group are known as -3 or omega-3 fatty acids o3. low intakes of o3 in western diets in relation to other sources of dietary fat such as omega-6 fatty acids are associated with poorer multi-spectrum health in epidemiological studies 119.
thus, specic focus on dietary changes to supply eicosapentaenoic and docosahexaenoic acids epa and dhathe dietary shortfall most common in the western worldis of interest; but it is worth noting the measurement, interaction, and eect of o3 and omega-6 fatty acids in relation to health is unclear and beyond the scope of this article. readers are referred to 120 for a review.
in addition to health, there is interest regarding the potential anabolic eects of epa and dha supplements 121 which are typically supplied via sh oil or in some cases algae oil. however, there are mixed data on sh oils ability to augment the muscle protein synthesis response to protein ingestion.
while a 2014 review paper highlighted a number of studies which found sh oil can enhance the response 122, a recent study found no eect on the mps response to a resistance training session and post-workout protein ingestion 123.
more importantly, data on longitudinal hypertrophy are few 124 and studies on resistance training performance are mixed 125 and largely not applicable or dicult to appraise due to the use of untrained participants or non-standardized, ecologically unrealistic training relative to bodybuilding. in a recent review specically addressing the question of whether or not o3 supplements might enhance hypertrophy 126, the authors concluded there is not currently sucient evidence to make such a claim.
while additional research is needed before o3 supplementation or diet alterations for that matter can be recommended for muscle-building purposes, the health benets of o3 supplementation are worth noting. for example, recent meta-analyses have reported sh oil supplementation reduces symptoms of depression 127, decreases risk of cardiac death 128, decreases blood pressure 129, and decreases waist circumference 130.
therefore, physique athletes may consider sh or algae oil supplementation daily 23 g epadha for general, multi spectrum health, but future study is needed to make recommendations regarding bodybuilding performance. table 2 summarizes recommendation for dietary supplements. sports 2019, 7, 154 12 of 19 table 2. recommendations for dietary supplements and dosage for bodybuilders.
dietary supplement recommended dosage creatine monohydrate 3 gday beta-alanine 35 gday citrulline malate 8 gday caeine 56 mgkg multivitaminmineral low dose micronutrient supplement 100 rda omega 3 23 g epadha 8. summary bodybuilders in the o-season should focus on consuming a slightly hyper-energetic diet 1020 above maintenance calories with the aim of gaining 0.250.5 of bodyweight per week.
advanced bodybuilders are advised to be more conservative with the caloric surplus and the rate of weekly weight gain. dietary protein intake is recommended to be 1.62.2 gkgday with a focus on sucient protein at each meal 0.400.55 gkgmeal and an even distribution throughout the day 36 meals. dietary fats should be consumed at moderate levels, neither too low nor high 0.51.5 gkgday, to prevent an unfavorable ftc ratio and to prevent reductions in testosterone levels.
after calories has been devoted to protein and fat, the remaining calories should come from carbohydrates while ensuring sucient amounts are consumed 35 gkgday. minor benets can be gained by consuming protein 0.400.55 gkgmeal in close proximity to training sessions 12 hours pre-exercise and within 12 hours post-exercise. cm 35 gday, and caeine 56 mgkg should be considered as they can yield ergogenic eects for bodybuilders.
further, ba 35 gday and citm 8 gday are dietary supplements that can be considered as they may potentially be of benet for bodybuilders, depending on individual training regimens. bodybuilders who are unable to consume a sucient intake of micronutrients and essential fatty acids in their diets should consider supplementing these nutrients to avoid deciencies. the primary limitation of this review is the lack of large-scale and long-term studies on bodybuilders in the o-season.
further research is warranted in this population to optimize nutrition and dietary supplement recommendations. author contributions: conceptualization, j.i.; methodology, j.i. and e.r.h.; investigation, analysis, draft preparation, writing and editing, j.i., p.f., s.e. and e.h. funding: this research received no external funding. acknowledgments: we want to thank alan aragon for valuable opinions and feedback. conicts of interest: the authors declare no conict of interest.
 journal of human kinetics volume 712020, 79-108 doi:10.2478hukin-2019-0096 79 section ii exercise physiology sports medicine 1 - the strength guys, birmingham, usa. 2 - auckland university of technology, sports performance research institute new zealand, auckland, new zealand. 3 - trexler fitness llc, raleigh, usa. 4 - fitbody and physique llc, stevens point, usa. authors submitted their contribution to the article to the editorial board.
accepted for printing in the journal of human kinetics vol. 712020 in january 2020. nutritional recommendations for physique athletes by brandon m roberts1, eric r helms2, eric t trexler3, peter j fitschen4 the popularity of physique sports is increasing, yet there are currently few comprehensive nutritional guidelines for these athletes. physique sport now encompasses more than just a short phase before competition and offseason guidelines have recently been published.
therefore, the goal of this review is to provide an extensive guide for male and female physique athletes in the contest preparation and recovery period. as optimal protein intake is largely related to ones skeletal muscle mass, current evidence supports a range of 1.8-2.7 gkg.
furthermore, as a benefit from having adequate carbohydrate to fuel performance and activity, low-end fat intake during contest preparation of 10-25 of calories allows for what calories remain in the energy budget to come from carbohydrate to mitigate the negative impact of energy restriction and weight loss on training performance. for nutrient timing, we recommend consuming four or five protein boluses per day with one consumed near training and one prior to sleep.
during competition periods, slower rates of weight loss 0.5 of body mass per week are preferable for attenuating the loss of fat-free mass with the use of intermittent energy restriction strategies, such as diet breaks and refeeds, being possibly beneficial.
additionally, physiological and psychological factors are covered, and potential best-practice guidelines are provided for disordered eating and body image concerns since physique athletes present with higher incidences of these issues, which may be potentially exacerbated by certain traditional physique practices. we also review common peaking practices, and the critical transition to the post-competition period.
key words: physique, bodybuilding, nutrition, contest preparation, competition recovery. introduction physique athletes are judged on aesthetics. originally the name of the sport, bodybuilding is now one of many competitive classes under the umbrella of physique competition which have emerged over the past decade including mens physique, classic bodybuilding and several classes for females alwan et al., 2019.
while recommendations for natural bodybuilders were previously published by helms et al. in 2014 helms et al., 2014, research has grown at a rapid rate, including an increase in the number of studies on females. contest preparation has become longer than in the past, with a focus on the post- competition phase transition.
for example, the length of contest preparation and recovery has increased from four months in the 1980s and 1990s bamman et al., 1993, to eight months or more in recent case studies pardue et al., 2017. recently, offseason recommendations for physique competitors were published by iraki and colleagues iraki et al., 2019.
therefore, the goal of this review is to provide a comprehensive, evidence-based guide for male and female physique athletes with a focus on the contest preparation period from nutrition and supplement recommendations, to physiological and psychosocial adaptations, as well as best practices for peaking and post- competition recovery.
80 nutritional recommendations for physique athletes journal of human kinetics - volume 712020 http:www.johk.pl methods the electronic databases pubmed, sportdiscus, google scholar, and medline were searched. each author was responsible for a section of the manuscript. the publications found were screened by each author responsible for a section.
long-term human studies were primarily selected, acute studies were accepted when directly relevant, and animal studies were used to help determine mechanisms when no such human research was available. authors cross-checked one anothers sections twice during the draft phase to ensure accurate interpretation of the included studies and appropriate scientific rationale behind recommendations. since this review is an expanded and updated evidence-based guide, a narrative review style was chosen.
nutrition while preparing for competition, the goal of physique athletes is to maintain lean muscle mass while decreasing body fat. contest preparation can last for 4 months or more during which calories are reduced and exercise is increased or maintained helms et al., 2014; kistler et al., 2014; pardue et al., 2017; rossow et al., 2013. a recent review reported male bodybuilders consumed 3800 calories per day and females consumed 2000 during non-competition phases spendlove et al., 2015.
yet, in the competition phase calories can be as low as 1600 for both sexes chappell et al., 2018; halliday et al., 2016; robinson et al., 2015. total caloric recommendations for individuals vary widely, therefore we will focus on macronutrient ranges relative to body weight or overall percentages. macronutrient intake protein protein plays a critical role in physique sport.
meta-analytic data support mean intake of 1.6 gkgday to maximize fat-free mass gains with resistance training; importantly, these data had an upper confidence interval of 2.2 gkgday morton et al., 2018, which agrees with the upper confidence interval 2.2 gkgday in a group of male bodybuilders using the indicator amino acid oxidation method bandegan et al., 2017.
recent work in aspiring female physique athletes has also indicated that higher relative to lower protein diets 2.5 gkgday vs. 0.9 gkgday increase lean body mass in the non-competition phase campbell et al., 2018. according to a recent review, physique athletes generally exceed these recommendations with males consuming 2-4 gkgday and females 0.8-2.8 gkgday spendlove et al., 2015.
another study reported ranges of 2.7-3.3 gkgday in competitors chappell et al., 2018; ultimately, it seems physique athletes easily meet and often exceed protein recommendations. muscle protein synthesis mps is often used as a surrogate of how protein intake or exercise affects muscle mass accrual.
physique athletes are in a caloric deficit during competition preparation, which in other populations decreases basal mps by 27 after only 5 days and 19 after 10 days areta et al., 2013; pasiakos et al., 2010. furthermore, there are data specifically in lean individuals indicating muscle protein breakdown mpb is elevated as early as 10 days into a caloric deficit carbone et al., 2014.
the combination of reduced mps and increased mpb results in a negative net protein balance, which could be attenuated with high protein intakes. however, there are very few studies, observational or intervention-based, comparing high and low protein intake in athletes during a caloric deficit campbell et al., 2018; helms et al., 2015; longland et al., 2016; walberg et al., 1988.
for example, a recent study found that over a 4-week period, a 40 caloric deficit with 2.4 gkgday of protein per day resulted in more lbm preservation and more fat mass loss compared to a group consuming 1.2 gkgday longland et al., 2016. this and previous data suggest higher protein consumption during a caloric deficit may be advantageous campbell et al., 2018; helms et al., 2014; longland et al., 2016; walberg et al., 1988.
protein has other important roles for physique athletes such as inducing fullness and satiety. a recent meta-analysis found higher protein meals increase acute ratings of fullness dhillon et al., 2016. in fact, in an energy deficit of 7 days, 2.9 gkgday of protein resulted in less cravings than 1.8 gkgday roberts et al., 2018.
in a pilot crossover study on resistance-trained athletes, lower stress, mood disturbance and diet related stress were reported during the high protein 2.8 gkgday compared to the moderate protein 1.6 gkgday phase helms et al., 2015. taken together, consuming a high protein diet may help physique athletes increase satiety, reduce hunger, and mitigate stress.
when assessing protein recommendations by brandon m roberts et al. 81 editorial committee of journal of human kinetics for athletes from various research groups, there is a converging range from 1.6-2.7 gkgday of protein hector and phillips, 2018; helms et al., 2014; jager et al., 2017; morton et al., 2018; stokes et al., 2018.
since there is currently little evidence that high protein intake negatively impacts health in non-clinical populations, we recommend 1.8-2.7 gkgday, or up to 3.5 gkgday for those specifically attempting to mitigate hunger, so long as such high intake does not displace fat or carbohydrate in the diet to a degree that it impairs performance. carbohydrate carbohydrates are consumed by physique athletes to maintain training performance and help recovery post-training.
a systematic review of dietary intake in bodybuilders reported large variability in carbohydrate intake with males consuming 243-637 gday 3-7.2 gkg, and females 160-415 gday 2.8-7.5 gkg spendlove et al., 2015. in a recent comparison of macronutrient to strict-dieting competitors, males consumed 323 g and females 218 g per day during the non- competition phase ismaeel et al., 2018. another study on mens physique athletes compared dietary intake in the cutting versus bulking phases.
they found during the bulking phase participants consumed 261 g 2.98 gkg and 178 g 2.3 gkg in the cutting phase lenzi et al., 2019. finally, in a recent study of contest preparation, males reduced carbohydrate intake on average from 4.4 to 4.1 gkg and females from 3.9 to 3.3 gkg chappell et al., 2018. an interesting observation in this study was that carbohydrate intake remained comparatively elevated 5.1 gkg among males who placed higher spendlove et al., 2015.
cumulatively, these data indicate there is a wide range of carbohydrate intake typically consumed by physique athletes. previous publications recommended 4-7 gkg for bodybuilders slater and phillips, 2011, which aligns with observational ranges seen in the literature. this range also allows room for individual differences. yet, athletes attempting to achieve extremely lean conditions may, at least in a certain phase of preparation, need to consume less than 4 gkg.
therefore, we recommend carbohydrate intake should be adjusted so that training performance is optimized while consuming adequate caloric intake to reach the desired physique. a realistic range for physique athletes that covers potential phases requiring very low energy intake to reach the desired level of leanness is 2-5 gkg per day.
to improve satiety during low carbohydrate and subsequently low energy phases, we recommend the majority of carbohydrates come from whole grains, fruits, and vegetables while avoiding higher energy-density sources holt et al., 1995; rolls et al., 1998; zhang et al., 2018. fat previous recommendations for dietary fat intake for bodybuilders were 15-20 of total calories helms et al., 2014; lambert et al., 2004. indeed, in observational studies, physique athletes fall within this range.
a systematic review reported fat intake among males was 19-241 gday 8-33 of calories and from 9 124 gday 9-35 among females spendlove et al., 2015. a case study of a male bodybuilder in competition preparation reported maintenance of fat intake at 0.7 gkg over the course of the study yet the percentage of calories from fat decreased from 29 to 21 pardue et al., 2017.
another study reported a female competitors intake of 0.35 gkg 15 during the final 10 weeks of the contest phase petrizzo et al., 2017. furthermore, a cross-sectional study reported similar starting points of fat intake 0.8 gkg for both sexes, with only a small reduction at the end of contest preparation among females 0.6 gkg chappell et al., 2018.
absolute fat intake in other studies of competitive bodybuilders was reported around 40-65 gday in some cases mitchell et al., 2017a; suryanarayana et al., 1969 and 79-90 gday in others mitchell et al., 2018. cumulatively, these data indicate physique athletes, again, have fat intake that vary widely across individuals and phases which occasionally fall outside previously recommended ranges.
dietary fat is often the last macronutrient of concern for physique athletes since protein and carbohydrates help build and preserve lean body mass, increase satiety, and aid training performance. while there is evidence in other populations suggesting dietary fat and testosterone levels are correlated sallinen et al., 2004; volek et al., 1997, recent findings in bodybuilders suggest this relationship is likely due to energy availability rather than fat intake specifically.
for example, a case-study of a male bodybuilder demonstrated a 72 decrease in testosterone while minimal relative changes in fat 82 nutritional recommendations for physique athletes journal of human kinetics - volume 712020 http:www.johk.pl intake occurred pardue et al., 2017. these data and others maestu et al., 2010 suggest changes in the hormonal milieu may be inevitable when preparing for a physique competition.
furthermore, it is problematic extrapolating physiological changes in obese subjects to those who are lean. there is also a lack of interventional studies of dietary fat and the impact on hormone levels in physique athletes, which makes it difficult to understand how fat intake could affect their physiology heni et al., 2014; suryanarayana et al., 1969.
dietary fat intake of 20-35 has been previously recommended for athletes with a lower level of 15-20 for bodybuilders helms et al., 2014; lambert et al., 2004. however, it is unlikely all individuals will be able to stay within this range during contest preparation since levels as low as 9 have been reported in the literature spendlove et al., 2015.
protein and carbohydrate should be prioritized for muscle retention, performance and satiety, and we therefore recommend fat intake of 10-25 to allow for individual variability and dietary flexibility yet we caution strongly against very low fat intake for long periods helms et al., 2014.
nutrient timing in the context of physique athletes, nutrient timing can be discussed in relation to the number, timing and macronutrient composition of meals consumed in proximity to training, sleep, and one another. for example, bodybuilders consume a mean of 6 daily meals chappell et al., 2018, which may be based on the concept that frequent protein consumption translates to greater anabolism, more complete digestion, and or greater energy expenditure.
in addition to the consumption of peri-workout protein, carbohydrate consumption is also a focus of physique athletes in the post-training period, as a way to both enhance the anabolic response to training and for rapid glycogen replenishment. another long-employed strategy in physique circles is consuming slow-digesting proteins such as casein prior to sleep to prevent an extended catabolic period. however, this has only recently been studied by sports scientists res et al., 2012.
the potential merits of each of these strategies are discussed in this section. protein dosage per-meal and in the post-training period during the postprandial period after a protein bolus, additional protein fails to increase mps until sufficient time has passed known as the muscle full effect. therefore, the even spread of protein servings over the course of the day is theorized to maximize the 24 hour mps area under the curve atherton et al., 2010.
however, the first protein dosing strategy to appear in the literature was consuming protein shortly following resistance training. this strategy was proposed to improve the efficiency of skeletal muscle repair and remodeling as peak mps rates are higher when protein is consumed in the post-training period tipton et al., 1999; however, a threshold leucine dose must be consumed for this to occur rieu et al., 2006.
researchers examined peri-workout protein boluses in multiple investigations to determine the dose needed to maximize mps macnaughton et al., 2016; moore et al., 2009; witard et al., 2014. following lower-body resistance exercise, a 20 g dose of egg protein stimulated mps to a greater degree than smaller doses of 5 g or 10 g, and a plateau occurred at a larger dose of 40 g moore et al., 2009.
a similar outcome was observed in another study, in which 20 g whey protein resulted in a maximal stimulus following lower body resistance training, without a greater increase when 40 g was consumed witard et al., 2014. however, when performing whole-body resistance exercise rather than lower body only, 40 g of whey produced a significantly higher mps response compared to 20 g macnaughton et al., 2016.
thus, when greater amounts of muscle mass are exposed to a stimulus, greater intake of protein is likely required to optimize adaptation. given these acute findings, one would speculate that the specific timed dose of protein in relation to the volume of training would be a critical aspect for longitudinal hypertrophy.
however, despite consistent short-term findings of enhanced mps when protein is consumed in the post-training period, authors of a 2013 meta- analysis reported no significant effect on hypertrophy when controlling for total daily protein intake in longitudinal studies, regardless of timing schoenfeld et al., 2013.
protein spacing and pre-sleep consumption interestingly, a similar disconnect between acute and chronic data exists in protein by brandon m roberts et al. 83 editorial committee of journal of human kinetics distribution research. for example, in a 12 hour tracer study of mps, the area under the curve was highest when four 20 g whey protein doses were consumed every three hours versus two 40 g doses six hours apart, and eight 10 g doses every hour and a half areta et al., 2013.
theoretically, given the muscle full effect post protein-feeding which creates a refractory period during which additional protein cannot further enhance mps atherton et al., 2010; moore et al., 2009, a physique athlete should therefore reach, but not exceed, this dose every few hours after the refractory period ends to maximize longitudinal gains in muscle mass.
yet, in a 2018 systematic review of protein supplement distribution, the authors noted similar fat free mass changes between individuals consuming fewer protein servings of a high dose compared to those consuming more protein servings of a moderate dose hudson et al., 2018. likewise, this disconnect has also been observed when comparing short term and longitudinal night-time protein feeding studies.
the first investigation of the acute response to pre- sleep casein consumption was performed in 2012 res et al., 2012. the researchers reported that compared to a placebo, a 40 g dose of casein enhanced protein balance to a greater degree during sleep, which was subsequently replicated kouw et al., 2017; trommelen et al., 2018.
in the first long-term study, researchers observed greater muscle mass and strength increases in a group consuming protein before going to bed, compared to a group consuming a placebo kouw et al., 2017. importantly, in this study total protein was unmatched. while the placebo group consumed 1.3 gkg in the 24-hour period, the protein- supplemented group consumed 1.9 gkg morton et al., 2018.
contrasting this finding, in the only two 24-hour protein matched studies comparing long-term outcomes between casein night-time supplementation and groups consuming casein earlier in the day, significant between group differences were not reported antonio et al., 2017; joy et al., 2018.
the explanation of why disparate outcomes are observed between short-term hypertrophy-proxy analyses mps and long-term protein distribution studies examining body composition, is likely due to the methods utilized in mps tracer studies. specifically, participants are often provided only protein powder, fasted, measured over hours, and are typically provided whey which is a fast digesting protein. thus, initial amino acid levels are lower, digestion is faster, and amino acid delivery is quicker.
these lab-based digestion and amino acid kinetics differ substantially from free-living conditions when protein is consumed from whole foods, multiple times per day, in combination with other foods, which slows digestion and subsequent amino acid delivery. indeed, in the real world, amino acids may often be available at any given time point schoenfeld and aragon, 2018. pre-sleep protein research also shares some of these lab-specific limitations.
as an example, an elevation in mps lasts at least six hours the entire time period studied after consumption of lean steak providing 26 g of protein pennings et al., 2013; yet 26 g is only slightly more than one-third the protein in an average us dinner kim et al., 2016.
furthermore, the typical us dinner takes longer to digest not only because of the higher protein content, but due to the addition of other nutrients which would further delay digestion such as fiber and dietary fat schoenfeld and aragon, 2018.
despite the limitations inherent to short term tracer studies, and the lack of theoretical proof in long term studies of muscle gain, from a physique perspective there is nothing to be lost and only a potential for gain by implementing a meal schedule which adheres to what would theoretically maximize the daily mps area under the curve.
to conclude with an example in line with our protein recommendations, a physique athlete consuming 3 gkg of protein could eat four meals containing 0.75 gkg or five meals containing 0.6 gkg per day. furthermore, the physique competitor could simply ensure they consumed one meal 1-2 hours prior to sleep with protein from a non-whey protein source, and finally, that one of their meals occurred within 1-2 hours before and after training.
meal frequency effects on body composition, appetite and energy expenditure physique athletes seeking muscle gain in the offseason eat comparable amounts to the high end of what olympic athletes often consume spendlove et al., 2015.
as the goal is not only to fuel performance, but to increase muscle mass between competitive seasons, a large volume of 84 nutritional recommendations for physique athletes journal of human kinetics - volume 712020 http:www.johk.pl food is consumed to achieve an energy surplus. the observation that bodybuilders consume 6 meals per day on average chappell et al., 2018 may be a function of practicality, rather than a reflection of physiological necessity or optimality.
while longitudinal data have not borne out the efficacy of manipulating the frequency of protein- feedings to enhance hypertrophy, smaller more frequent eating occasions may theoretically aid the digestive process in the offseason and in clinical sports nutrition texts they are recommended as more feasible than simply eating more at existing meals dean and burke, 2006.
indeed, greater hunger and desire to eat is reported by those consuming more frequent, smaller meals perrigue et al., 2016, and a moderate association between meal frequency and total energy intake is reported among elite athletes burke et al., 2003. yet, recent large-scale epidemiological data indicate more frequent feedings 3 are associated with increases in the bmi kahleova et al., 2017.
furthermore, the existing meta-analyses and reviews of meal frequency interventions do not support an association between higher meal frequencies and fat loss, improved metabolic health or increased energy expenditure hutchison and heilbronn, 2016; raynor et al., 2015; schoenfeld et al., 2015. therefore, we recommend physique athletes consume a moderate meal frequency with an even protein distribution.
peri-workout carbohydrate the rationale for consuming carbohydrate following, during, and prior to training for bodybuilders is to facilitate glycogen replenishment for future resistance training sessions, maintain intra-session performance, and fuel proximal resistance training bouts, respectively mitchell et al., 2017a.
however, complete resynthesis can be achieved within 24 hours following glycogen depletion when ample carbohydrates are consumed jentjens and jeukendrup, 2003 and bodybuilders do not typically train the same muscle groups on subsequent days, such that performance would be impacted by glycogen depletion hackett et al., 2013. indeed, most bodybuilders train each muscle group 1-2week hackett et al., 2013.
furthermore, only 24 40 of muscle glycogen is depleted during standard volumes of resistance training macdougall et al., 1999; tesch et al., 1986.
to conclude, training performance in subsequent sessions is unlikely to be impaired if carbohydrates are not consumed in the post workout period, and hypertrophy is also not likely to be enhanced by the additional consumption of carbohydrate alongside post-workout protein, as insulin rises to adequate levels to fully suppress mpb via the consumption of amino acids alone aragon and schoenfeld, 2013; helms et al., 2014.
glycogen is not the only mechanism by which carbohydrate intake could enhance or preserve resistance training performance when consumed near a training bout. indeed, no greater effect on performance was observed after consuming a diet containing 7.7 gkgday of carbohydrate for 48 hours compared to only 0.37 gkgday when 15 sets of 15rm lower-body exercise were performed mitchell et al., 1997.
given this finding, it seems the body is capable of maintaining adequate glycogen in the face of carbohydrate restriction via metabolic conversions of other substrates volek et al., 2016, which is sufficient to sustain resistance training performance if ample calories are still consumed.
however, in the context of a calorically restricted diet, there is evidence that lower carbohydrate intake can impair bodybuilding performance walberg et al., 1988 and that consumption of carbohydrates prior to training may improve it dudgeon et al., 2017.
for example, one study found consumption of carbohydrate after an overnight fast resulted in the performance of greater training volumes compared to water bin naharudin et al., 2019, although subjects were habitual breakfast eaters, which may have impacted the results.
furthermore, positive outcomes may be unrelated to muscle glycogen levels, and rather a result of stabilization of blood glucose, or perhaps liver or brain glycogen replenishment, or a central effect on delaying or reducing fatigue. some bastos-silva et al., 2019; decimoni 2018, but not all studies clarke et al., 2015; dunkin and phillips, 2017; painelli et al., 2011 show that carbohydrate mouth rinsing can increase resistance training volume or delay fatigue bazzucchi et al., 2017.
however, aggregate findings are inconsistent, and the exact mechanisms are elusive. thus, further exploration of the effect of peri-workout carbohydrate intake for the purposes of enhancing bodybuilding training performance is needed. with that said, by brandon m roberts et al. 85 editorial committee of journal of human kinetics mouth rinsing provides a unique potential for dieting physique athletes to enhance performance via carbohydrate, without additional energy consumption.
in total, insufficient evidence exists to strongly state that pre-, intra- or post-training carbohydrate consumption enhances resistance training performance or hypertrophy; however, it seems prudent that physique athletes consume a meal containing easily digestible carbohydrate within 2 hours prior to training to avoid any potential decrement to performance.
furthermore, there would be no harm in attempting a mid- session mouth-rinse with a glucose-based drink as an attempt to maintain or improve performance during contest preparation, although future research is needed to confirm the efficacy of this practice. supplements dietary supplements appear to be a major component of the dietary strategies implemented by physique athletes.
a recent study by chappell et al. 2018 surveyed physique competitors on their nutrition habits in the months leading up to a natural bodybuilding competition. the authors noted the competitors routinely consumed between five and seven supplements during the contest preparation period; males averaged 7.0 supplements, whereas females 5.4. protein powder was most commonly consumed, with survey results indicating 75.0 of males and 88.9 of females consumed them.
multivitamin supplements were used by 53.5 of males and 60 of females. the number of competitors using branched-chain amino acids bcaas, creatine, fat burners, individual amino acid supplements, pre- workout supplements, and omega-3 fatty acids ranged from 39.4 to 49.4 in males, and 19.9 to 53.5 in females.
protein powders are not inherently more efficacious than any other high-quality protein source and are generally viewed as a convenient means of accomplishing the previously discussed guidelines for protein intake. as such, protein supplementation will not be discussed in detail.
given the potential for diets to become restrictive late in contest preparation, ingestion of a well- formulated multivitamin supplement may be an effective strategy for ensuring suitable micronutrient intake, although efforts should be made to obtain sufficient nutrition from whole food sources. given that multivitamins are a convenient means of obtaining nutrients that would otherwise be obtained from a well- structured diet, multivitamins will not be covered in detail either.
rather, this section discusses the dietary supplements with the greatest potential to directly enhance competitive outcomes for physique athletes. creatine creatine is one of the most commonly used supplements among physique athletes. daily endogenous creatine production is approximately one gram per day cooper et al., 2012, and omnivorous diets typically provide about 1-2 grams per day. nonetheless, muscle creatine stores are generally only 60-80 saturated kreider et al., 2017.
by supplementing with creatine, muscle storage of creatine and phosphocreatine are maximized, thereby delaying fatigue and enhancing performance. creatine supplementation has been studied extensively, with results typically showing improvements in repetitive, high- intensity exercise performance of up to 10-20, along with increased lean body mass when used in conjunction with resistance training kreider et al., 2017.
to date, no legal dietary supplement has been shown to enhance resistance training performance as robustly and reliably as creatine, and both the international society of sports nutrition kerksick et al., 2018 and the international olympic committee ioc maughan et al., 2018 list creatine in their top tier of evidence-based dietary supplements for performance enhancement.
to increase intramuscular creatine storage to an ergogenic degree, loading protocols often involve ingestion of 20 grams of creatine per day or approximately 0.3 gkg of body mass divided between four equal doses, for approximately one week, followed by single daily maintenance doses of approximately five grams 0.07 to 0.1 gkg.
alternately, evidence suggests that individuals who wish to bypass the loading stage can achieve ergogenic elevations in muscle creatine storage by consuming maintenance doses for approximately four weeks hultman et al., 1996. a large body of evidence suggests creatine is safe and well-tolerated with any gastrointestinal discomfort alleviated by splitting the total creatine intake into smaller doses ostojic and ahmetovic, 2008.
the most consistent side effect is an abrupt increase in body mass, 86 nutritional recommendations for physique athletes journal of human kinetics - volume 712020 http:www.johk.pl typically in the range of 1-2 kg.
this initial weight gain is attributable to increased water retention due to the osmolytic nature of creatine; in theory, this fluid should largely be stored in the intracellular fluid compartment and should not substantially affect the outward appearance of the physique in a negative manner. nonetheless, it would be prudent for physique athletes that are not creatine users to avoid a loading phase within the final 1-2 weeks prior to a competition.
caffeine caffeine is a primary component of many pre-workout supplements and fat burners; thus, finding its way into two categories of common bodybuilding supplements. as such, chappell et al. 2018 observed above-average daily caffeine intake in both male 322 mgday and female 252 mgday physique athletes.
the ioc recognized caffeine as one of the few dietary supplements with evidence supporting its capacity to directly improve exercise performance in a recent consensus statement maughan et al., 2018. while the early literature investigating performance- enhancing benefits of caffeine focused largely on endurance exercise outcomes costill et al., 1978, more caffeine research pertaining to strength and power has emerged in the last fifteen years.
a meta-analysis published in 2018 grgic et al., 2018 indicated caffeine exerts a small, but statistically significant positive effect on maximal strength and power, such as one-repetition maximum and the vertical jump. there is also evidence that caffeine enhances muscular endurance grgic et al., 2019, which likely relates more closely to habitual training of physique athletes.
finally, the numerous physiological adaptations that accommodate energy restriction in lean athletes are likely to induce lethargy, hunger, and reduced energy expenditure. caffeine use during contest preparation may confer benefits extraneous to its ergogenic effect by favorably affecting subjective the energy level, appetite, and energy expenditure harpaz et al., 2017.
taken together, current evidence would suggest that caffeine has the potential to directly improve performance for physique athletes. dosing strategies often involve consuming a dose of 3-6 mgkg of caffeine, approximately one hour prior to exercise maughan et al., 2018.
doses beyond 3-6 mgkg do not appear to be more efficacious goldstein et al., 2010, and it should be noted that despite an acute lethal dose that is estimated to be around 10,000 mg, it is often conservatively recommended that healthy adults restrict their daily caffeine intake to no more than roughly 6 mgkg per day nawrot et al., 2003. nitric oxide precursors nitric oxide no precursors, such as citrulline and dietary nitrate, are also common components of multi-ingredient pre-workout formulas.
nitric oxide is a gaseous cell signaling molecule with widespread effects throughout the body. as reviewed by bailey et al. 2011, the potential mechanisms by which no may enhance exercise performance include exercise efficiency, mitochondrial respiration, sarcoplasmic reticulum calcium kinetics, vasodilation, glucose uptake, and muscle fatigue bailey, 2011.
collectively, these exercise-related effects of no have prompted interest in the potential ergogenic applications of ingredients that increase no production. due to the short half-life and poor stability of no kelm, 1999, supplementation strategies for increasing no production are restricted to supplementation with precursors of no. in the nitric oxide synthase- dependent nos-dependent pathway of no production, arginine is the direct precursor of no.
unfortunately, arginine has relatively poor oral bioavailability schwedhelm et al., 2008, and exercise studies with arginine supplementation have largely yielded underwhelming results bescos et al., 2012. in contrast, citrulline has substantially greater bioavailability, and oral citrulline supplementation efficiently increases blood arginine levels schwedhelm et al., 2008. perez-guisado and jakeman 2010 found citrulline enhanced repetitions to fatigue during resistance exercise.
a recent meta-analysis trexler et al., 2019 reported a small, but significant effect of citrulline-based supplements for such outcomes. the exact mechanisms underlying the ergogenic effects of citrulline-based supplements are not entirely elucidated at this time. for resistance training studies, the most common dosing strategy yielding ergogenic effects involves consuming 8 grams of citrulline malate presumably in a 2:1 citrulline to malate ratio, approximately one hour before exercise.
in an alternate pathway of no production, dietary nitrate is reduced to nitrite, and further reduced to no, in an nos-independent manner bailey, 2011. in the past decade, a substantial by brandon m roberts et al. 87 editorial committee of journal of human kinetics body of literature reports inorganic nitrate and beetroot juice, a source of dietary nitrate, enhances endurance exercise capacity mcmahon et al., 2017.
in contrast, few studies have evaluated the effects of nitrate on resistance exercise. mosher et al. 2016 found six days of beetroot juice supplementation containing 400 mg nitrate per dose enhanced bench press repetitions to fatigue over three sets taken to failure. similarly, beetroot juice enhanced leg extension speed and power coggan et al., 2015, in addition to explosive force production in fatigued muscle tillin et al., 2018.
these effects on muscle contractile function may relate to no-induced increases in intracellular calcium concentrations and myofilament calcium sensitivity coggan and peterson, 2018. studies documenting ergogenic effects of nitrate tend to provide at least 400-500 mg of nitrate 2-3 hours prior to exercise, and chronic dosing strategies appear to enhance performance more reliably than acute supplementation.
furthermore, there is mechanistic evidence to suggest no plays a permissive role in muscle hypertrophy by promoting satellite cell activation anderson, 2000. as such, the pharmacological blockade of endogenous no production blunts hypertrophic adaptations to overloading in rats smith et al., 2002, and treatment with isosorbide dinitrate an no-donor enhanced exercise-induced hypertrophy in mice leiter et al., 2012.
nonetheless, whether the findings from these mechanistic studies translate to healthy humans consuming no precursor supplements is unknown. as a cautionary note, there is large variability in the dosing of beetroot in commercial supplements bailey et al., 2011. in summary, there are mechanistic justifications for the use of no precursors by physique athletes, and preliminary studies suggesting beneficial effects on strength and power.
however, more research is needed to draw definitive conclusions about the ergogenic applications of no precursors, including citrulline and nitrate, for the purposes of enhancing resistance training performance and hypertrophy. beta-alanine as reviewed previously trexler et al., 2015, beta-alanine is the rate-limiting precursor to carnosine synthesis. when supplemented, beta- alanine increases the intramuscular concentration of carnosine, which functions as an intracellular buffer.
proton accumulation occurs during high- intensity exercise due to rapid atp turnover. this proton accumulation leads to a local reduction in ph, which is thought to contribute to fatigue and reduced capacity for force production.
baseline muscle carnosine concentrations vary depending on a number of factors including age, sex, training status, muscle fiber type distribution, and dietary habits, but beta-alanine supplementation has been shown to increase muscle carnosine by 64 after four weeks harris et al., 2006 and by 80 after ten weeks hill et al., 2007.
beta-alanine is recognized as an effective ergogenic aid by both the international society of sports nutrition kerksick et al., 2018 and ioc maughan et al., 2018, but its effects vary based on the physiological demands of the exercise task tested. for example, a meta- analysis published in 2012 hobson et al., 2012 found the most pronounced effects were observed in exercise tests lasting 1-4 minutes.
as a proton buffer, the ergogenic effects of beta-alanine are most pronounced for tasks requiring rapid atp production via anaerobic glycolysis, such as high- intensity continuous or intermittent bouts lasting 30 seconds to 10 minutes maughan et al., 2018.
based on the primary ergogenic mechanism, benefits could potentially be observed in programs with relatively high repetition ranges outlaw et al., 2016 or short rest periods between sets, although it remains unclear if beta-alanine promotes hypertrophy.
one study found the combination of creatine and beta-alanine improved resistance training-induced hypertrophy significantly more than a placebo or creatine alone hoffman et al., 2006, whereas beta- alanine failed to enhance increases in lean body mass in response to resistance training in other research outlaw et al., 2016.
nonetheless, it is possible that beta-alanine could be used to improve training adaptations by promoting greater training volume throughout the course of a resistance training program hoffman et al., 2008. competition preparation length of contest preparation unfavorable physiological adaptations to weight loss in lean athletes are related both to absolute body fat levels and the magnitude of acute relative energy deficiency.
by manipulating the length of contest preparation and, therefore, the rate of weight loss, the size of the energy deficit can be modified to influence the degree of acute 88 nutritional recommendations for physique athletes journal of human kinetics - volume 712020 http:www.johk.pl relative energy deficiency. for example, mero et al. 2010 investigated the effects of two different rates of weight loss in recreationally trained females on protein-matched 1.4 gkg diets.
one group was assigned to lose 1 kg per week with an energy deficit of 1100 kcalday, while the other was assigned to lose 0.5 kg per week with an energy deficit of 550 kcalday. after the four-week intervention, the group with a faster rate of weight loss lost more weight and fat mass, but also experienced a significant reduction in testosterone and an increase in sex hormone binding globulin. garthe and colleagues 2011 studied two rates of weight loss in elite male and female athletes.
one group was assigned to lose 0.7 of their body mass per week with a 19 reduction in energy intake, while the other group was assigned to lose 1.4 per week with a 30 reduction in energy intake. in order to standardize the total amount of weight lost, the slow group spent longer duration of time in the weight loss phase than the fast group 8.5 versus 5.3 weeks, respectively. both groups lost similar amounts of total body mass.
however, the slow group lost significantly more fat mass than the fast group, and the slow group had a significant increase in lean mass while lean mass remained unchanged in the fast group. regardless of group, females gained lean mass during the intervention; males in the slow group gained lean mass, whereas males in the fast group tended to lose lean mass. furthermore, the slow weight loss group experienced more favorable changes in exercise performance.
in recent years, a number of case reports and small studies have documented contest preparation in male and female physique athletes. these studies have ranged from 14-32 weeks from the beginning of preparation to the first competition halliday et al., 2016; kistler et al., 2014; pardue et al., 2017; robinson et al., 2015; rohrig et al., 2017; rossow et al., 2013; tinsley et al., 2019.
the loss of fat-free mass is a common observation among male physique athletes; all of the previously mentioned male case reports documented some degree of fat-free mass loss, with some as high as 6.6 kg kistler et al., 2014.
of the data available, duration of contest preparation does not appear to clearly dictate the degree of fat- free mass loss, as similar and fairly substantial losses have been reported in contest preparation periods as short as 14 weeks robinson et al., 2015 and up to 26 weeks kistler et al., 2014.
it is difficult to determine ideal contest preparation duration using case reports, as the loss of fat-free mass is inevitably influenced by several factors, which include but are not limited to differences in overall weight loss, dietary approaches, resistance training approaches, volume of cardiovascular exercise, and genetic variability between individuals.
nonetheless, chappell and colleagues 2018 noted that male competitors receiving high contest placings tended to implement a rate of weight loss of 0.46 of body mass per week, which was slower than the non- placers, who lost over 0.5 of body mass per week. in contrast, case reports documenting comparatively higher losses of fat-free mass implemented weight loss rates of 0.7 kistler et al., 2014 and 1.0 robinson et al., 2015 per week.
as such, chappell and colleagues 2018 speculate that slower weight loss may lead to more favorable placements by facilitating retention of fat-free mass. in female case reports, lean mass has remained stable halliday et al., 2016 or increased by up to 1.3 kg rohrig et al., 2017 over the course of preparation, with rates of weight loss generally ranging from 0.4 to 0.75 of body mass per week.
a larger study hulmi et al., 2016 also found a slight increase in fat-free mass in female physique athletes 0.4 kg, measured via dexa over the course of contest preparation, with average duration of 19.8 weeks. while research to date has not documented marked reductions in fat-free mass during contest preparation among females, unfavorable effects on performance, hormones, and menstrual status have been noted.
such unfavorable outcomes highlight the importance of carefully managing the magnitude of energy deficiency, but it is difficult to draw conclusions about ideal preparation duration due to homogenous approaches in the literature.
taken together, the limited data indicate that rate of weight loss is more physiologically relevant than the duration of contest preparation per se, and slower rates of weight loss 0.5 of body mass per week are generally preferable for attenuating unfavorable adaptations to weight loss and losses of fat-free mass.
retention of fat-free mass appears to be a more pressing concern in male competitors than female competitors, which may relate to greater overall reductions in body mass, more drastic changes in testosterone levels, by brandon m roberts et al. 89 editorial committee of journal of human kinetics lower absolute and relative body fat percentage requirements for the male bodybuilding category, competitors being more experienced and closer to their genetic ceiling for muscle mass, and possibly additional factors.
diet periodization while the rate of weight loss during contest preparation is often discussed as a linear weekly reduction in weight, the energy deficit is often applied in a nonlinear manner. previous research has shown that bodybuilders frequently implement refeeds mitchell et al., 2017a and cheat meals chappell et al., 2018, which both represent transient elevations in caloric intake for a fixed amount of time.
in addition, many studies have investigated the implementation of diet breaks, in which individuals on a weight loss diet temporarily revert to ad libitum, self-selected eating habits keogh et al., 2014 or increase caloric intake to achieve neutral energy balance byrne et al., 2018. carbohydrate restriction has the potential to reduce training capacity walberg et al., 1988, and intramuscular glycogen depletion has been shown to directly impair muscle function ortenblad et al., 2013.
as such, high carbohydrate refeeds and cheat meals or cheat days may confer transient positive effects on training quality during a prolonged energy deficit. cheat mealsdays, refeeds, and diet breaks fall on a spectrum of nonlinear fat loss strategies, as presented in figure 1.
such strategies also offer a psychological reprieve from the restrictive dietary constraints imposed during a weight loss diet, allowing the competitor to enjoy foods that may be too high in carbohydrate or caloric content to be regularly incorporated into the diet. however, given the prevalence of binge eating episodes among physique athletes discussed in subsequent sections, the practice of unstructured cheat meals or cheat days may be contraindicated in many circumstances.
aside from psychological factors, arguably the most intriguing application of nonlinear fat loss strategies for physique athletes pertains to the potential to mitigate some of the unfavorable physiological adaptations that accompany weight loss. the physiological adaptations associated with contest preparation are related to both fat mass reduction and short-term energy availability.
while fat mass reduction is a necessary goal of contest preparation, energy availability can be transiently manipulated. leptin is reduced after only days of energy restriction keim et al., 1998, long before significant fat loss has occurred. this initial drop relates to short-term energy availability, and is particularly influenced by carbohydrate restriction jenkins et al., 1997.
similarly, three days of overfeeding with high carbohydrate intake increased leptin by 28 and 24-hour energy expenditure by 7, whereas a similar magnitude of overfeeding on a high fat diet did not dirlewanger et al., 2000. however, this may not be practical for physique athletes, as the 40 energy surplus required to elicit the response may cause substantial fat accretion that would be only minimally offset by the 7 increase in energy expenditure.
this incomplete compensation for high energy intake has also been observed directly in physique athletes trexler et al., 2017; resting energy expenditure ree acutely increased in the period immediately following competition, but the increase was small compared to the substantial increase in caloric intake.
while these results suggest that implementing periods of neutral or positive energy expenditure may help mitigate unfavorable changes in hormone concentrations and energy expenditure during weight loss, such strategies must implement a conservative magnitude and duration of refeeding that does not oppose the overall progression of fat loss. it is also currently unknown how short of a period of maintenance calories would be needed to affect the metabolic rate.
a recent study byrne et al., 2018 investigated the effects of two-week diet breaks on weight loss and energy expenditure. one group followed a continuous weight loss program for 16 weeks, whereas the other group alternated between two weeks of an energy deficit and two weeks of energy balance. both groups spent equal total weeks in an energy deficit of the same size.
results indicated that the group implementing intermittent diet breaks lost more fat mass and total weight and experienced a smaller reduction in ree after correcting for body composition. overall, the strategy of implementing two-week periods of energy balance partially attenuated the anticipated drop in the metabolic rate, without requiring periods of positive energy balance.
however, the overall weight loss process took approximately twice as long, which may be viewed as a prohibitively inconvenient trade-off by some 90 nutritional recommendations for physique athletes journal of human kinetics - volume 712020 http:www.johk.pl competitors. in an effort to minimize the inefficiency of nonlinear approaches, other studies have implemented diet breaks of shorter duration.
in one instance, an 8-week study keogh et al., 2014 evaluated one-week diet breaks implemented every other week. the continuous energy restriction group followed a 5500-kilojoule energy restriction each week of the study, whereas the intermittent group alternated between one week of 5500-kilojoule energy restriction and one week of their usual diet.
weight loss observed in the group with diet breaks was not significantly different than the comparator group on a continuous weight loss diet, despite the differing magnitude of energy restriction. a different study davoodi et al., 2014 implemented a protocol in which energy was restricted for 11 days, followed by a 3-day diet break. this two-week cycle was repeated three times, for six total weeks.
the comparator group, in contrast, implemented continuous energy restriction for the entire six-week period. results showed that intermittent energy restriction with 3- day diet breaks allowed for a similar degree of weight and fat loss, and attenuated reductions in the resting metabolic rate, despite higher average caloric intake throughout the intervention.
the limited data available suggest implementation of nonlinear or intermittent energy restriction strategies, such as diet breaks and refeeds, may partially attenuate some of the unfavorable physiological adaptations to energy restriction, thereby imparting favorable effects on weight loss outcomes. however, these strategies extend the timeline of the weight reduction process. as such, the ideal magnitude, duration, and timing of short-term caloric increases are not currently known.
theoretically, the most efficient strategy would effectively increase caloric intake in a sufficient magnitude and duration to offset physiological adaptations to weight loss, while minimizing the risk of fat accretion and the amount of overall time spent dieting. for a more extensive discussion of nonlinear weight loss strategies, readers are directed to the recent review by peos and colleagues 2019. peak week the final week prior to competition is commonly referred to as peak week.
the overall goal of the peak week is to make muscles appear larger and more detailed by filling glycogen stores while minimizing subcutaneous water. a recent study on peaking practices in bodybuilders found that 94 percent of competitors alter their nutritional approach during the peak week chappell and simper, 2018.
historically, this included approaches such as potassium loading, sodium restriction and water restriction kleiner et al., 1990; shephard, 1994; steen, 1991, while more recent studies have observed a decline in practices such as sodium and water restriction, these approaches are still used by a significant number of competitors chappell and simper, 2018.
however, some or all of these approaches may be misguided in natural competitors, as there are at least theoretical roles for sodium, water and carbohydrate to enhance onstage appearance. carbohydrates one of the primary goals during the peak week is to enhance muscular fullness.
each gram of glycogen can result in a minimum of 3-4 grams of stored water within muscle in a dehydrated state and up to 17 grams when carbohydrate loading is coupled with adequate hydration fernandez-elias et al., 2015; olsson and saltin, 1970. practically, increasing carbohydrate consumption leading up to a competition should enhance the appearance of a physique.
for example, one study observed an increase in bicep muscle thickness the day of the competition when competitors were loading carbohydrates bamman et al., 1993. competitors likely do not gain muscle mass late in contest preparation kistler et al., 2014; rossow et al., 2013; therefore, it is assumed this increase in muscle thickness was due to carbohydrate loading.
a recent study of competitors found 83 did some form of carbohydrate loading during the final week prior to competition chappell and simper, 2018. in practice, the pattern in which carbohydrates are loaded differs between competitors. some competitors front load place their highest carbohydrate days early in the week while others back load place their highest carbohydrate days later in the week figure 2.
moreover, there is evidence that after 3 days of glycogen depletion, a large carbohydrate load can cause glycogen supercompensation where as much as 1.79 times initial glycogen can be stored in muscle goforth et al., 1997. this may result in an even more full and extreme look onstage; therefore, this approach could be used by competitors in divisions that require a more by brandon m roberts et al. 91 editorial committee of journal of human kinetics extreme look such as bodybuilding.
however, competitors in all divisions may benefit from some form of carbohydrate loading unless they are not lean enough, then they may want to either pick a later competition or continue to lose body fat throughout the final week rather than increasing carbohydrates. water body water is stored in compartments. approximately 23 of body water is intracellular whereas 13 is extracellular. of the extracellular compartment, 20 is plasma and the other 80 is interstitial fluid.
a common goal for physique athletes in the peak week is to minimize interstitial fluid. oftentimes this is done through reducing water intake kleiner et al., 1990; shephard et al., 1994; steen et al., 1991; however, this can reduce muscle water content, resulting in a decrease in muscle size costill et al., 1976.
decreasing water intake also reduces blood volume and blood pressure which can make it more difficult for a competitor to increase blood flow to the desired muscles prior to stepping onstage during the pumping up process, which could result in sub- optimal appearance to judges.
anecdotally, some competitors think water is the cause of visual smoothing on show-day, yet in practice it is our collective anecdotal opinion that smoothness is typically the result of excess body fat or loading too many carbohydrates either in total, or too quickly. a 70 kg male can store approximately 500 g glycogen roughly 100 g in liver and 400 g in muscle wasserman, 2009.
during the transitional period while carbohydrates are being metabolized, and once glycogen stores are full, glucose can accumulate outside of the cell pulling water into the extracellular space. therefore, it is important that competitors load an appropriate number of carbohydrates over an appropriate timeframe to fill muscle glycogen stores while also consuming ample water. sodium sodium is the primary extracellular solute.
since water follows solutes, some competitors eliminate sodium in an attempt to reduce extracellular water chappell and simper, 2018. however, plasma sodium is tightly regulated in the kidneys. for example, sodium excretion is significantly reduced when switching to an extremely low sodium diet rogacz et al., 1990. therefore, removing sodium from the diet will not have a significant impact on extracellular fluid removal.
sodium elimination may negatively impact a competitors look onstage since glucose is transported through a sodium-coupled transporter schultz and curran, 1970, which could influence glycogen storage. sodium also impacts blood pressure which may affect a competitors ability to get a pump and subsequently affect transient muscle size and vascularity onstage stachenfeld, 2008.
due to sodiums effects on blood pressure it may be advisable to increase sodium on the day of competition, prior to stepping onstage to increase muscle pump and vascularity in appropriate divisions. practical recommendations direct scientific research comparing peaking approaches in physique athletes is lacking. therefore, we are hesitant to give recommendations on peaking strategies.
based on the current evidence, there is potential harm in reducing sodium, water, or carbohydrates, and almost all competitors manipulate these variables in the peak week. we therefore recommend not reducing any of these three nutritional variables. carbohydrate loading can be a viable option if the athlete is lean enough, but no comparisons between front- or back-loading exist to determine which is superior and in practice, this may differ between individuals.
ultimately, we recommend testing peak week strategies, if an athlete has sufficient time, before their competition. 92 nutritional recommendations for physique athletes journal of human kinetics - volume 712020 http:www.johk.pl figure 1 the spectrum of nonlinear fat loss strategies. physique athletes often implement nonlinear dieting approaches, in which energy intake is transiently increased during a fat loss phase.
such approaches range from cheat days to strict diet breaks, with each approach featuring unique benefits and drawbacks. figure 2 methods for carbohydrate loading during peak week. conceptual methods of loading carbohydrates during peak week. front-loading would begin earlier in the week, resulting in a need to maintain fullness over the course of several days. back-loading would occur later in the week and could result in less time to make adjustments to a physique.
competition day intake is subjective to how an athlete responds to the prior higher carbohydrate days. by brandon m roberts et al. 93 editorial committee of journal of human kinetics table 1 hypothetical seasonal guidelines for mitigating harm in physique sport competition preparation 1. non-dichotomous good or bad or on or off view of foods or diet. 2. moderate weight loss rates. 3. macronutrient or calorie ranges versus food source restriction. 4. flexible meal schedules.
5. scheduled, supervised physique assessment, body weight averages. 6. intermittent dieting strategies; semi-regular diet break weeks or days. transition to offseason 1. quantified, tapered, but substantial energy surplus. 2. return to offseason body composition in 1-2 months. 3. intentional re-introduction of and focus on internal cues; e.g. hunger. offseason 1. adoption of primarily internal-cue guided energy intake. 2. maintain sport-supportive nutrition habits versus relying on tracking.
3. biofeedback e.g. rate of weight gain to augment energy intake. 4. qualitative response to biofeedback, e.g., be less full after meals. to clarify transition to offseason point two; as stated in paragraph four of post-competition recovery, we recommend athletes reach sustainable body weight 1-2 months following competition, not necessarily peak-offseason body weight or fat.
post-competition recovery while the physiological adaptations associated with contest preparation can be quite unfavorable, they are transient. reversing adaptations involves both correcting the short- term energy gap by transitioning from negative to positive energy balance, and restoring fat mass and fat-free mass lost during contest preparation.
as for short-term energy balance, it is common for physique athletes to acutely, but abruptly increase caloric intake immediately following competition mitchell et al., 2017a; trexler et al., 2017. merely transitioning from negative to positive energy balance is likely to have favorable effects on partial restoration of the metabolic rate trexler et al., 2017 and hormones that are sensitive to short-term fluctuations in energy availability, such as leptin, ghrelin, and insulin borer et al., 2009.
however, full recovery of hormones and full reversal of adaptive energy expenditure suppression are likely to require some degree of fat mass and fat- free mass restoration. at the end of a contest preparation diet, the physique athlete is physiologically primed for weight regain. as reviewed by maclean and colleagues 2011, such a physiological state is characterized by reduced energy expenditure and elevated hunger.
due to the cyclical nature of 94 nutritional recommendations for physique athletes journal of human kinetics - volume 712020 http:www.johk.pl weight gain and weight reduction associated with bodybuilding mitchell et al., 2017a, competitors rarely attempt to maintain contest-level body fat percentages for an extended period of time.
significant weight regain is typically observed within days of competition trexler et al., 2017, and binge eating episodes are common within this time period andersen et al., 1995. as such, studies have documented cases in which both male and female participants have regained up to 8 kg in the first 3-4 weeks following competition lamar-hildebrand et al., 1989; mitchell et al., 2017a. however, there are potential drawbacks to approaches that favor rapid weight regain.
rodent data suggest that overfeeding after sustained weight loss is accompanied by suppressed oxidation of dietary fat and adipocyte hyperplasia jackman et al., 2008. as noted in a review by peos and colleagues 2019, the addition of new adipocytes results in a greater total capacity for fat storage, and yields smaller adipocytes that secrete less leptin and are more prone to energy storage.
this propensity for adipocyte hyperplasia may therefore increase the likelihood of regaining more weight than was lost, which is known as body fat overshooting saarni et al., 2006. in line with this hypothesis, there is evidence to suggest that athletes with repeated cycles of weight loss and regain tend to have a higher body mass index later in life saarni et al., 2006, and it is quite common for humans to overshoot saarni et al., 2006.
furthermore, research in the general population suggests that the early phase of weight regain is characterized by preferential gain of fat mass saarni et al., 2006, and research in competitive physique athletes has documented similar results trexler et al., 2017. the time course of weight restoration varies significantly in the literature.
in some cases, physique athletes return to their baseline weight within nine weeks post-competition tinsley et al., 2019, whereas others remain slightly below their baseline weight a full six months after competition rossow et al., 2013.
provided competitors maintain positive energy balance after competition and restore a large portion of the body mass lost, blood levels of ghrelin, thyroid hormones t3 and t4, insulin, and cortisol generally approach baseline levels within 3-4 months following competition hulmi et al., 2016; pardue et al., 2017; rossow et al., 2013.
in the case of leptin a body fat signal rossow et al., 2013 and testosterone pardue et al., 2017; rossow et al., 2013, levels may not fully recover until 5-6 months post- competition, but are generally trending to pre- competition levels within this timeframe. when it comes to restoration of the menstrual cycle in female competitors that develop amenorrhea, an even longer recovery timeline may be required.
the development of menstrual cycle irregularity or complete cessation is quite common in female competitors hulmi et al., 2016, particularly in competitive classes that require a greater degree of leanness. unfortunately, efforts to reverse menstrual cycle irregularities often result in prolonged and highly variable recovery timelines.
it seems prudent to advocate that physique athletes implement a rate of weight regain after competition that facilitates full recovery, but avoids deposition of excessive fat mass in the early phase of weight regain.
within the first 1-2 months following competition, the athlete should aim to reach a sustainable and comfortable body weight; after this immediate phase of controlled weight restoration, they would then aim to restore their body fat percentage to their ideal off-season level and fully restore fat-free mass in a fairly linear manner over the subsequent 1-2 months, depending on the magnitude of weight that was lost.
in this context, ideal off-season body composition refers to a sustainable body fat percentage that is conducive to normal endocrine status, facilitates lean mass accretion, mitigates the need for excessive weight loss for subsequent competitions, and resolves the hyperphagia experienced following competition.
for individuals prone to excessively rapid weight regain, strategies to successfully manage controlled refeeding are likely similar to the strategies that facilitate successful weight loss maintenance.
such strategies include favoring high protein and high fiber intake, regular self- monitoring of body weight and caloric intake, reducing time spent in sedentary activities, maintaining a similar diet structure with low energy-density foods while avoiding highly palatable foods that could trigger overeating, and maintaining high levels of structured exercise; in essence, such competitors post-competition recovery diets would be qualitatively similar to their competition diets in composition and schedule, but higher in total calories and by brandon m roberts et al. 95 editorial committee of journal of human kinetics macronutrients melby et al., 2017.
ultimately, complete recovery of physiological parameters is typically observed 4-6 months following competition, provided the physique athlete maintains positive energy balance and regains a significant portion of the weight lost during the preparation period. it seems likely the timeline of recovery would be accelerated by consumption of a larger energy surplus and a more rapid weight regain.
physiological adaptations there are several physiological adaptations that occur during contest preparation and recovery. in this section we will cover body composition, menstrual cycle, daily activity and sleep. body composition nearly all studies of male competitors observe a reduction in lean mass, while lean mass loss reported in female competitors is typically lower during contest preparation.
for example, some studies of female competitors have observed either little lean mass loss during preparation halliday et al., 2016; hulmi et al., 2016 or even a slight increase petrizzo et al., 2017; rohrig et al., 2017. the reason for this difference between sexes is unknown; however, it may be due to baseline testosterone levels being higher in males, making them more responsive to the large decline in testosterone that typically occurs during contest preparation.
lean mass differences could also be due to the level of conditioning required in bodybuilders versus other physique classes. we cover physiological adaptations more fully in previous sections. menstrual cycle it was previously thought that reproductive function in women was regulated by body fat levels; however, there is increasing evidence that energy availability is the primary driver of reproductive function loucks, 2003.
energy availability is the difference between total energy intake and exercise energy expenditure relative to fat free mass. this difference is the energy available for physiological and metabolic processes like creating hormones and building bone fagerberg, 2018. to prevent menstrual cycle abnormalities, female athletes are encouraged to consume at least 30 kcalkg lean mass daily.
energy intake below this amount may result in several hormone-related changes, including disruption of luteinizing hormone pulsatility. this can result in amenorrhea, a reduction in bone density and increased fracture risk loucks et al., 2011. yet, to reach competitive levels of body fat onstage, many female competitors may need to consume fewer than 30 kcalkg lean mass at least at some stage during contest preparation.
as a result, menstrual cycle abnormalities are widely reported in female competitors elliot et al., 1987; haff et al., 2001; hulmi et al., 2016; kleiner et al., 1994; walberg- rankin et al., 1993, which can persist into the post- competition period. for example, in a cohort of female competitors, 63 reported menstrual cycle abnormalities during contest preparation; however, 28 still reported abnormalities after a post-competition recovery period mean length 17.5 weeks hulmi et al., 2016.
moreover, a drug- free female figure competitor who reached 23.2 kcalkg fat free mass daily during contest preparation did not have a normal menstrual cycle for 71 weeks following competition despite increasing caloric intake to 30 kcalkg lean mass halliday et al., 2016. taken together, these findings highlight the importance of taking an offseason between competitions, especially for female competitors.
during the offseason, caloric intake should be increased to at least 30 kcalkg lean mass daily. offseason duration should be long enough so that a female competitor regains their monthly cycle and has a normal cycle most of the offseason. daily activity non-exercise activity thermogenesis neat total daily energy expenditure tdee is the sum of the basal metabolic rate, the thermic effect of food, exercise activity thermogenesis and non-exercise activity thermogenesis neat.
neat encompasses all non-exercise movement such as occupation-related activity, leisure-time activity and involuntary activities like postural control, twitching and fidgeting. energy expended from neat can vary up to 2,000 calories per day between individuals of similar size levine, 2007. moreover, caloric expenditure from fidgeting can range from 100-800 calories daily ravussin et al., 1986. due to this large variability, neat can play a significant role in energy balance.
importantly, neat may decline while dieting peos et al., 2019. in a cross-sectional study, obese participants who lost an average of 96 nutritional recommendations for physique athletes journal of human kinetics - volume 712020 http:www.johk.pl 23 of their body weight had an 18 lower tdee than individuals who had never dieted. moreover, 71 of this difference was due to reductions in neat in response to dieting weigle et al., 1988.
in an interventional study, a 10 reduction in body weight resulted in an average reduction in neat of 262 caloriesday, whereas a 20 reduction in body weight reduced neat by 500 caloriesday on average in obese subjects. therefore, the amount of weight lost during a diet may impact the magnitude of neat reduction leibel et al., 1995. to date, there is not direct research on changes in neat in physique athletes.
however, it is likely that competitors could experience a significant reduction rossow et al., 2013. from a practical standpoint, tracking daily steps may help counteract reductions in neat during contest preparation. in fact, a meta-analysis on pedometer use and activity found individuals who track steps using a pedometer increase their step counts bravata et al., 2007.
however, we caution against competitors pushing to extremes in daily activity because there is evidence that tdee may not increase further at high levels of activity due to reductions in involuntary movement pontzer et al., 2016. sleep it is recommended adults sleep 7-9 hours per night and achieve a sleep efficiency of 85 time asleep in bed to promote general health hirshkowitz et al., 2015; ohayon et al., 2017.
interestingly, athletes tend to sleep less 6.5 hnight and their sleep quality is lower hausswirth et al., 2014; leeder et al., 2012. while sleep deprivation has a minimal effect on acute strength performance fullagar et al., 2015; it plays a role in decision making and mood, which could directly affect a physique athlete. there is also evidence that lack of sleep could compromise body fat loss or elevate lbm loss nedeltcheva et al., 2010.
anecdotally, some physique athletes tend to have sleep issues, but there is only one study measuring sleep in a bodybuilder pardue et al., 2017. during a 13-month period including contest preparation and recovery, sleep efficiency was reduced by a maximum of 3.6. oddly, sleep duration increased 20 and sleep efficiency increased 8.9 in the contest preparation phase, likely because the subject started the study sleeping only 6 hours per night pardue et al., 2017.
there was also a trend for subjective sleep quality to decrease in month 4 of contest preparation. overall, more data are needed with subjective and objective indices before definitive statements regarding the effect of contest preparation on sleep quality or quantity can be made.
our recommendation for physique athletes is similar to that of other athletes: sleep in a dark environment with a comfortable temperature use earplugs or eye masks if necessary, restrict mental, emotionally or physically demanding activities prior to bed, and use dim light for 2 hours before bedtime bonnar et al., 2018. physique athletes should aim for 8-9 hours of sleep per night.
there also appears to be large inter-individual response to the effects of reduced sleep, therefore larger studies are needed, especially in physique athletes mcneil and st- onge, 2017.
psychosocial aspects of competitive physique sport because physique competitors are judged based on aesthetics rather than performance and the necessity of lowering body fat to essential levels, the risks of psychosocial distress andersen et al., 1995, and developing eating and body image disorders mitchell et al., 2017c requires consideration.
given the cross-sectional nature of most research in this area, and the multifaceted relationship between numerous factors with eating behavior, the underlying causes of distress are not fully understood.
psychological distress is likely driven by three factors: 1 physiological adaptations to extreme dieting having biopsychosocial effects kalm and semba, 2005, 2 a disproportionate number of individuals with a history of or risk of developing psychopathology participating in competition mitchell et al., 2017b, and 3 monitoring behaviors secondary to achieving successful body composition changes such as regular self-weighing pacanowski et al., 2015, nutrition tracking levinson et al., 2017, and physique checking shafran et al., 2004.
each factor may contribute to higher incidences of distress and body and eating disorders than is observed in other weight training populations goldfield, 2009; goldfield et al., 2006; mangweth et al., 2001; mitchell et al., 2017b; walberg and johnston, 1991. thus, each factor is reviewed, and tentative best-practice guidelines are provided when possible.
by brandon m roberts et al. 97 editorial committee of journal of human kinetics psychological distress among physique athletes while some psychological benefits such as the perceived ability to take on new challenges asridis et al., 2014 occur during contest preparation, negative effects manifest as well. in one male natural bodybuilding case study, mood disturbance initially decreased.
however, one- month prior to competition, mood disturbance increased three-fold, then increased seven-fold relative to baseline immediately prior to competition, only returning to normal six months post-season rossow et al., 2013. in part, psychological effects of contest preparation are biologically driven. for example, early research found that severe, prolonged, energy restriction increased irritability, introversion, enthusiasm and motivation kalm and semba, 2005.
these effects are partly physiologically mediated; subsequent work exposing healthy men to energy deprivation caused disturbed sleep, fatigue, and urges to consume sweet and savory food nindl et al., 1997. among competitors, compensatory coping behaviors can manifest to control cravings, such as avoidance of social situations asridis et al., 2014.
hulmi and colleagues 2016 reported similar physiological signs in female competitors, as a 3 to 4 month post- competition period was required for most but not all hormone markers to return to baseline.
in some phases, such as post-competition weight regain, females may experience greater stress as they share parallel physiological responses with men, but may have higher tendencies to dislike their off- season physique possibly mediated by societal pressure asridis et al., 2014; murray et al., 2016. indeed, contest preparation drives some psychological effects, but others linger months after competing.
andersen and colleagues 1995 reported 81.5 of male bodybuilders were preoccupied with food, 46 engaged in binge eating, and 30-50 were angrier or more anxious post-competition. post-competition binge-eating is likely a normal hyperphagic response, whereby an extreme desire for food occurs after substantial weight loss dulloo et al., 1997; weyer et al., 2000, with associated distress likely caused by weight regain conflicting with physique goals.
non-biological factors also influence disordered eating. symptoms of depression and negative affect can contribute to binge eating, as suggested by goldfield and colleagues 2006, who found competitive bodybuilders binge eat more than recreational bodybuilders, despite both reporting similar levels of dietary restraint goldfield et al., 2006. this suggests a higher percentage of competitors have attitudes or traits that expose them to greater psychological consequences during contest preparation.
indeed, five of the 16 male physique division competitors in a recent study reported a prior eating or body image disorder lenzi et al., 2019, and in a 1991 study 42 of female competitors used to be anorexic, 67 were terrified of becoming fat and 50 experienced uncontrollable urges to eat walberg and johnston, 1991.
some researchers argue binge eating and other behaviors are exacerbated among bodybuilders who judge their self-worth largely on their ability to control their weight and shape goldfield, 2009.
since the 1990s, authors reported higher incidences of disordered eating behaviors, body image concerns, and full eating disorders in competitors of both sexes when compared to non-competitive weightlifters goldfield 2009; goldfield et al., 2006; mangweth et al., 2001; mitchell et al., 2017b; walberg and johnston, 1991.
recently, mitchell and colleagues 2017b reported higher body image concerns in competitors compared to resistance training non-competitors in a meta- analysis, with symptoms associated with general anxiety, social physique anxiety, depression, neuroticism, perfectionism and inversely associated with self-concept and esteem. finally, ones dietary restraint disposition can impact psychology. dietary restraint is subdivided into two types: rigid and flexible control westenhoefer et al., 1999.
rigid control is characterized by eating only diet foods, avoiding desired foods, fasting, highly disciplined calorie counting and avoiding off limit foods. while flexible control shares the aspect of restraint, it is marked by eating a variety of foods, modifying portions, and adjusting eating if earlier meals contained higher calorie items, and is generally considered more adaptive and sustainable westenhoefer et al., 2013.
rigid behaviors like fasting prospectively predict agras and telch, 1998, and in cross-sectional research are linked, with binge eating among women with bulimia and binge eating disorder masheb et al., 2011.
in weight loss cohorts, there are links between rigid restraint and binge eating, shapeweight 98 nutritional recommendations for physique athletes journal of human kinetics - volume 712020 http:www.johk.pl overvaluation, body dissatisfaction, disinhibited eating, dichotomous thinking, depressive and anxiety symptoms, and poorer wellbeing linardon, 2018; linardon and mitchell, 2017; smith et al., 1999; timko and perone, 2005; tylka et al., 2015; westenhoefer et al., 1999.
in contrast, flexible restraint is linked with lowered disordered eating, body image concerns, body weight, and psychological distress shearin et al., 1994; smith et al., 1999; westenhoefer et al., 1999, 2013 and increases in flexible control are associated with binge eating abstinence, greater weight loss in the course of therapy blomquist and grilo 2011, and in one study, predicted long-term weight maintenance among women with obesity teixeira et al., 2010.
while flexible restraint may be more adaptive, adverse outcomes are occasionally associated with it linardon and mitchell, 2017; timko and perone, 2005; tylka et al., 2015. this may stem from overlapping behaviors among categories of restraint, as surprisingly, flexible control is highly correlated with rigid control rs .50.
this calls into question how separate these components are, suggesting promoting flexible control could unintentionally prompt rigid practices timko and perone, 2005; westenhoefer et al., 2013. indeed, flexible restraint is associated with positive outcomes only when its shared variance with rigid restraint is removed linardon and mitchell, 2017; tylka et al., 2015. however, it is unclear how to distinctly prescribe flexible rather than rigid control to avoid potential harm tylka et al., 2015.
that said, a key factor may be black and white views of eating, which mediate the association between restrained eating and weight regain palascha et al., 2015; as viewing foods in non-dichotomous terms is a shared aspect of intuitive eating, which has no restraint component at all tylka and kroon van diest, 2013, and flexible control westenhoefer et al., 1999. physique and dietary monitoring practices likely follow ones restraint disposition, and thus carry potential to increase risks.
some authors speculate self-monitoring in all cases can exacerbate eating disorder symptoms simpson and mazzeo, 2017. authors of several cross- sectional studies report associations between self- monitoring and binge eating, eating concerns, and shapeweight overvaluation in those with and without clinically significant eating disorders linardon et al., 2019; linardon and messer, 2019; mountford et al., 2006; shafran et al., 2007; simpson and mazzeo 2017.
furthermore, causal links between shape checking and body dissatisfaction exist in some shafran et al., 2007, but not all bailey and waller, 2017 experimental work. however, authors of two recent weight loss studies reported no significant differences in eating and body image disorder symptoms between those implementing self-monitoring or those not jospe et al., 2018; steinberg et al., 2014.
to explain this discrepancy, it may be these monitoring behaviors are detrimental only when performed rigidly fairburn, 2008, or by individuals likely to implement them rigidly, such as those with clinical or subclinical eating disorders.
mitigating harm given the increased likelihood of competitors already or previously having, or possibly carrying a predisposition towards eating and body image distress, and the obligatory exposure to both the biological drive towards hyperphagia and some of the behaviors which can exacerbate disordered eating, we echo the recommendations of the recently published narrative review specifically on this topic by helms and colleagues 2019.
table 1 below is reprinted here with permission which outlines recommendations in each season of competitive bodybuilding helms et al., 2019.
to summarize: in the preparation phase, slow to moderate weight loss rates rather than rapid, which are associated with eating and body image disorder symptoms mitchell et al., 2017b, should be implemented; non black-and-white views of foods and adherence should be emphasized palascha et al., 2015; and rather than high frequency physique checking, scheduled and coach-supervised physique assessment should occur as are performed in clinical eating disorder practice fairburn, 2008.
in the transition from preparation into the offseason, a tapered but intentional caloric surplus should be implemented with the goal of steady, but controlled weight regain, and the re-introduction of internal rather than externally-cued nutrition regulation should occur to facilitate a gradual return to non- restrained eating e.g. hunger and satiety mediated portion control rather than food weighing and calorie tracking.
finally, similar to the standard personal by brandon m roberts et al. 99 editorial committee of journal of human kinetics training practice of screening physical health craig and eickhoff-shemek, 2015, coaches should enlist the aid of nutrition and mental health care professionals psychologists, therapists, registered dietitians to screen the mental health of athletes prior to beginning contest preparation to ensure they are fully informed of risks, and have the appropriate mental health care professionals available to them.
conclusion in conclusion, there are a myriad of factors to consider for physique athletes in contest preparation periods as well as the post- competition period transitioning into the off- season. having a structured plan based on the factors within this article is recommended, but additional study of physique athletes is needed to provide more specific guidelines.
 research article open access nutritional strategies of high level natural bodybuilders during competition preparation a. j. chappell , t. simper and m. e. barker abstract background: competitive bodybuilders employ a combination of resistance training, cardiovascular exercise, calorie reduction, supplementation regimes and peaking strategies in order to lose fat mass and maintain fat free mass.
although recommendations exist for contest preparation, applied research is limited and data on the contest preparation regimes of bodybuilders are restricted to case studies or small cohorts. moreover, the influence of different nutritional strategies on competitive outcome is unknown. methods: fifty-one competitors 35 male and 16 female volunteered to take part in this project.
the british natural bodybuilding federation bnbf runs an annual national competition for high level bodybuilders; competitors must qualify by winning at a qualifying events or may be invited at the judges discretion. competitors are subject to stringent drug testing and have to undergo a polygraph test. study of this cohort provides an opportunity to examine the dietary practices of high level natural bodybuilders.
we report the results of a cross-sectional study of bodybuilders competing at the bnbf finals. volunteers completed a 34-item questionnaire assessing diet at three time points. at each time point participants recorded food intake over a 24-h period in grams andor portions. competitors were categorised according to contest placing. a placed competitor finished in the top 5, and a non-placed dnp competitor finished outside the top 5. nutrient analysis was performed using nutritics software.
repeated measures anova and effect sizes cohens d were used to test if nutrient intake changed over time and if placing was associated with intake. results: mean preparation time for a competitor was 22 9 weeks. nutrient intake of bodybuilders reflected a high-protein, high-carbohydrate, low-fat diet. total carbohydrate, protein and fat intakes decreased over time in both male and female cohorts p 0.05.
placed male competitors had a greater carbohydrate intake at the start of contest preparation 5.1 vs 3.7 gkg bw than dnp competitors d 1.02, 95 ci 0.22, 1.80. conclusions: greater carbohydrate intake in the placed competitors could theoretically have contributed towards greater maintenance of muscle mass during competition preparation compared to dnp competitors. these findings require corroboration, but will likely be of interest to bodybuilders and coaches.
keywords: bodybuilders, calories, competition, contest preparation, dieting, energy restriction, natural, nutrition, supplementation, physique correspondence: a.chappellshu.ac.uk food and nutrition group, sheffield business school, sheffield hallam university, howard street, sheffield s1 1wb, uk the authors.
2018 open access this article is distributed under the terms of the creative commons attribution 4.0 international license http:creativecommons.orglicensesby4.0, which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided you give appropriate credit to the original authors and the source, provide a link to the creative commons license, and indicate if changes were made.
the creative commons public domain dedication waiver http:creativecommons.orgpublicdomainzero1.0 applies to the data made available in this article, unless otherwise stated. chappell et al. journal of the international society of sports nutrition 2018 15:4 doi 10.1186s12970-018-0209-z background in competitive bodybuilding, athletes are judged on their muscularity muscle size, conditioning the absence of body fat and symmetry muscular proportion.
in order to achieve the required physique, athletes undertake fat loss regimes, whilst attempting to maintain lean body mass lbm accrued prior to the fat loss period 1, 2. athletes and their coaches use a combination of resist- ance training, cardiovascular exercise, calorie restriction, supplementation and peaking strategies in order to obtain a competition-ready physique 3.
bodybuilders preparing for competition usually follow self- or coach- prescribed diets, which often are comprised of a limited and repetitive food regime, with the sole aim of supply- ing specific amounts of protein, fat and carbohydrate 38. following these stringent dietary approaches is common practice and connects with the notion of being hardcore celebrated amongst bodybuilders 9. al-
though broad recommendations exist for both nutrient intakes and exercise prescription 1012, these recom- mendations are theoretical, imprecise, and open to inter- pretation. there is also a paucity of applied research on high level bodybuilders. recently a meta-analytic study combined 18 separate studies on the dietary intake of bodybuilders 13.
this study reported that male competitors consumed on aver- age 3292 kcal per day during contest preparation, with 52 of that energy coming from carbohydrate, 28 from protein, and 22 from fat. female competitors by way of comparison consumed 1739 kcal per day with 59 en- ergy from carbohydrate, 28 energy from protein and 12 energy from fat.
although the meta-analysis incor- porated 385 participants, the majority of the studies were published in the 1980s and 1990s and were non- specific about participants phase of training, which may be off-season prior to beginning contest preparation, during contest preparation often a period of 824 weeks before competition, or 1 week from competition the immediate pre-contest or peaking phase.
the frequent use of androgenic anabolic steroids aas amongst com- petitive bodybuilders also confounds identification of op- timal nutritional strategies and training regimes. indeed one third of the studies included in the meta-analysis reported aas use by athletes 13.
furthermore, the practices employed by athletes in the new physique cat- egories, such as mens physique, figure athletic, sports fitness and swimsuitbikini, which emphasize beauty ra- ther than muscularity have not been scrutinised. more- over, the lack of scrutiny of the practices employed within the aforementioned divisions may mislead body- builders as to what are the most effective strategies for competitive bodybuilding.
within the united kingdom uk, the british natural bodybuilding federation bnbf runs nine regional qualifying competitions; the regional qualifiers culminate in a uk final championship, where the overall winner is awarded professional status. this cohort provides an ex- cellent opportunity to study the nutritional practices of a high level group of natural bodybuilders.
the strategies employed by the most successful natural bodybuilders can be compared to recommendations 11, which in- clude protein intake of between 2.3 and 3.1 gkg of lbm, fat intake of 15 to 30 of total calories, with the remaining calories from carbohydrate and a weekly weight loss of 0.5 to 1 of bodyweight bw 11. here we report the results of a recent cross-sectional study in- vestigating the nutritional strategies of natural body- building competitors at the bnbf finals.
methods design both male and female bodybuilders participating in the bnbf finals were included in the study. all competitors qualified for the uk final competition by winning their re- spective weight or age class at a regional qualifying event or were invited at the judges discretion; providing they had also been placed in the top three of their weight age category.
all qualifying class winners were subject to drug testing based on urine analysis; targeted drug testing of other non-placed athletes was also carried out. further- more, all class winners at the final bnbf final were subject to the same drug testing criteria, and all competitors signed a waiver declaring their compliance with the world anti-doping agency code 14, 15.
a certified wada la- boratory the sports medicine research and testing la- boratory, salt lake city, usa carried out all drug testing. a qualified polygrapher polygraphed all competitors prior to taking part in the competition as an additional method to verify natural status. the study was advertised via the bnbf social media page, and registered competitors were recruited in per- son by the first author at the outset of the uk finals.
all potential participants were fully informed of the study aims and methods via a participant information sheet; those agreeing to participate provided written informed consent. participants then completed a 34-item ques- tionnaire see additional file 1. the questionnaire in- quired about dietary and training habits, and body weight change at three time points throughout contest preparation start, middle and end.
participants retro- spectively recorded their typical food intake over a 24-h period in grams andor portions. missing questionnaire data and clarification about foods consumedportions were followed up via email. the questionnaire also in- cluded items relating to the regular use of a coach, and cheat meal consumption. a cheat meal, is when competitors veer from their self- or coach-prescribed diet.
refeeds are strategies where competitors consume chappell et al. journal of the international society of sports nutrition 2018 15:4 page 2 of 12 a known amount of energy in addition to their pre- scribed dietary intake, in the belief that it increases metabolic rate based on information from popular mag- azines and websites 16.
results are reported separately for the male and fe- male cohort as well as for participants who placed in the top 5 placed and those who were placed out of the top 5 of their class did not place dnp. all male competitors were from the bodybuilding cat- egory, while the female competitors were recruited from the bodybuilding, athletic and figure classes.
both the athletic and figure class emphasises less muscularity than female bodybuilding, with bodyfat levels distinguishing the two categories: lower ath- letic or higher figure bodyfat. participant characteristics competitors reported their offseason prior to starting their contest preparation and competition the day prior to taking part in the competition bodyweights. total weight loss and percentage weight loss were calculated as the difference between the start and end body weight.
body mass index bmi kgm2 was calculated from self-reported height and end body weight, body fat per- centage bf and method used to estimate was based on self-reported accounts. only competitors who re- ported a bf measured using callipers n 9 were in- cluded in the calculation of mean bf and fat free mass index ffmi 17. the ffmi was calculated based on the estimated fat free mass ffm at the end point of the contest preparation and expressed as kgm2,.
dietary analysis nutritional analysis of contest diets was performed using the nutritics nutrition analysis software version 4.267 academic edition, nutritics, dublin, ireland. macronu- trient intake in grams per kg of bodyweight per day g kg bw and energy intake in kilocalories per kg of body- weight kcalkg bw was calculated for the start and end of the diet period, based on competitors self-reported bodyweight.
macronutrients from dietary supplements were included in the analysis based on manufacturers specifications from brand websites. the mean number of food items consumed by a competitor at each phase of preparation was counted. the percentage of the diet made up of specific food groups was based on the euro- pean food safety agency food classification system for dietary reporting 18. any food group making up less than 1 of the dietary intake was placed in the other in- gredients category.
beverages, including water, teas and coffees were excluded from the food group analysis. consumption of sugary soft drinks was not reported by any competitor and so do not feature in this analysis.
supplements supplements were split into 12 different categories reflecting those most commonly utilised by competitors: multivitamin, vitamin c, vitamin d, mineral or joint supplement, omega 3, pre-workout, protein powder, branch chain amino acids bcaa, creat- ine supplement either directly or part of another sup- plement, individual amino, fat burners and miscellaneous supplements used too infrequently to be awarded their own category.
statistical analysis data analysis was performed using the statistical analysis package ibm spss version 24. successful bodybuilders placed and unsuccessful bodybuilders dnp were compared for dietary intake total energy intake kcal per day, and total nutrient intake g per day, using a re- peated measures analysis of variance anova. energy and nutrient intake adjusted for bodyweight kcalkg bw; gkg bw was log-transformed to account for skewed data and was then analysed by repeated mea- sures anova.
the effect of time, contest place and time contest place was examined. mauchlys test of sphericity was applied to data to examine if sphericity was violated and if this was the case the greenhouse- geisser estimate was utilised. for ease of interpretation we report the data as energy and nutrient intake ad- justed for bodyweight.
hypothesis testing for categorical variables was performed using a pearson chi-square for: contest outcome placed and dnp, use of coaching and consumption of cheat meals. independent t-tests were used to identify if contest outcome placed and dnp was related to: i years training, ii years compet- ing, iii starting weight, iv end weight, v weight loss, vi weight loss, vii weeks dieting, viii weight loss per week, ix caffeine intake, x number of meals, and xi fluid intake.
statistical significance was declared where p 0.05 and the null hypothesis was rejected.
cohens d practical significance was calculated for the effect of contest outcome placed and dnp on energy and macronutrient intakes for male bodybuilders as opposed to the multiple female competitive classes for gkg bw, and kcalkg bw. pooled standard deviations were used to calculate cohens d and effect sizes were multiplied by an adjustment factor 0.975, to correct for bias to pro- duce d. effect size cut-offs were defined as 0.2, 0.5, and 0.8 for small, medium and large effect sizes respectively.
results participant characteristics fifty-one bodybuilders 35 male, 16 female participating in the bnbf finals volunteered for the study, comprising just over a third of the competition entrants n 143. all male competitors were from the bodybuilding chappell et al. journal of the international society of sports nutrition 2018 15:4 page 3 of 12 category, while female competitors were from 3 separate categories: bodybuilding n 3, figure n 9 and ath- letic n 4.
the female categories were pooled for ana- lysis. one male competitor was excluded due to failing the pre-competition polygraph. the cohort included 6 competitors who had competed in a world amateur championship 4 of whom were former world amateur champions. the cohort also included 4 competitors who had previously placed at a bnbf uk final, 3 com- petitors who had won a regional overall bnbf title and 14 who had previously won a class at a bnbf regional qualifier.
complete dietary and training information was available for 32 male and 15 female competitors. the majority of the competitors 66.7 men, and 88.0 women used a coach for guidance with training, nutrition, posing and feedback on their physique. male competitors who were placed did not differ from those dnp in use of a coach 60.0 versus 59.1 respectively 2 1 0.550, p 0.46.
there was also no difference 2 1 0.163, p 0.69 in the employment of a coach amongst female competitors who placed 100.0 and dnp 78.0. participant characteristics, including age, years training and competing, bodyweight at the start of contest preparation and length of time following a diet are presented in table 1. body composition estimation ten male and 5 female competitors provided a self- reported bf along with the method they used to esti- matecalculate it.
skin callipers were the most popular method of assessment with 53 of competitors 5 male and 4 female using this method. thirteen percent of competitors estimated bf by looking in the mirror, while the method employed by the remaining 34 was not stated. competitors did not specifically report whether a trained professional performed the skin calli- per tests. an estimate of ffmi was calculated for male and female competitors who reported bf measured by callipers.
the estimated ffmi for placed males was 22.74 2.55 kgm2, with two competitors exceeding 25.0 kgm2. in female competitors, the mean estimated ffmi was 18.1 1.95 kgm2. dietary intake macronutrients, and diet diversity the mean macronutrient and energy intakes reported as gkg bw and kcalkg bw at the start and end of contest preparation are presented in table 2. macronutrient and energy intakes presented as medians and interquartile ranges, are provided as an additional file see add- itional file 2.
analysis of log-transformed energy and nutrient intake adjusted for bodyweight indicated no sig- nificant difference in protein, carbohydrate, fat and en- ergy intakes between placed and dnp competitors. amongst both male and female competitors there was a significant decrease in energy intake over time male p 0.001, female p 0.01, while there was also a non- significant decrease in carbohydrate intake over time amongst male competitors p 0.054.
results of the cohens d adjusted effect size testing for macronutrient and energy intake scaled to bodyweight indicated a small to medium effect on competitive outcome for gkg bw protein, in male competitors who placed compared to dnp d start 0.49, 95 ci 0.25, 1.30, end 0.60, 95 ci 0.15, 1.37. a similar outcome was noted for carbohydrate intake between males who placed and dnp d start 1.02, 95 ci 0.22, 1.80, end 0.35, 0.40, 1.10.
small effect sizes were noted for both fat as table 1 characteristics of competitive bodybuilders recruited from the british natural bodybuilding federations british championship male competitors female competitors male female placed sd dnp sd p result placed sd dnp sd p result mean sd mean sd age 36.1 17.4 31.8 10.1 0.40 33.7 9.1 34.7 11.5 0.86 32.2 14.0 34.2 10.2 years training 14.2 14.1 10.9 7.9 0.40 8.1 10.3 4.0 2.7 0.28 11.6 11.1 6.0 7.3 years competing 3.5 2.6 2.7 2.2 0.34 1.9 0.7 2.3 1.3 0.40 3.1 2.4 2.1 1.1 competitions this season 2.3 0.8 3.1 1.9 0.18 2.3 1.0 2.9 1.5 0.38 2.6 1.5 2.6 1.2 diet start weight kg 82.5 10.4 89.2 10.4 0.08 64.7 9.5 62.9 4.9 0.63 85.4 10.8 63.8 7.1 diet end weight kg 73.1 8.5 77.9 8.7 0.12 54.5 7.0 54.8 3.9 0.91 75.1 8.8 54.7 5.3 total weight loss kg 9.4 5.6 11.3 5.2 0.32 10.2 4.3 8.1 3.4 0.29 10.3 5.4 9.1 3.9 weight loss per week kg 0.6 0.7 0.5 0.7 0.74 0.4 0.1 0.5 0.4 0.81 0.5 0.7 0.5 0.3 weight loss 11.1 5.8 12.5 5.2 0.48 15.4 5.2 12.7 4.9 0.30 11.8 5.5 14.0 5.1 end bmi kgm2 24.0 1.8 24.6 1.9 0.40 20.4 1.6 20.6 1.4 0.79 24.3 1.8 20.5 1.4 diet length weeks 23.9 11.3 23.2 8.2 0.17 24.1 8.4 22.4 9.2 0.71 24.9 9.6 23.3 8.6 p result, difference in means between place and dnp.
male competitors, placed n - 15, dnp n - 18, male mean n - 32, female competitors, placed n - 7, dnp n - 9, female mean n - 16.
data analysed using a student t test where p 0.05 equals statistical significance abbreviations: sd standard deviation, placed finished in the top 5 of the competition, dnp did not place in the top 5 of the competition, bmi body mass index chappell et al. journal of the international society of sports nutrition 2018 15:4 page 4 of 12 gkg bw d start 0.24, 95 ci 0.97, 0.52, end 0.25, 95 ci 0.50, 1.0 and energy as kcalkg bw d start 0.71, 95 ci 0.04, 1.47, end 0.65, 95 ci 0.09, 1.41 between males who placed and dnp.
mean macronutrient and energy intakes reported as total g per day and kcal per day for the start, middle and end of contest preparation are presented in table 3. total carbohydrate, fat and energy intakes significantly declined over time p 0.05 in both the female and male groups, while there was a non-significant decrease in protein intake p 0.09 amongst male competitors. the mean number of food items consumed by male competitors was: start 11.5 3.6, middle 9.7 4.7, and end 10.0 3.5.
amongst female competitors the mean number of food items consumed was: start 12.3 3.4, middle 13.2 4.0, and end 10.6 3.9. the contribution of different food groups to the competitors diets is pre- sented in table 4. no competitor reported consuming composite diet dishes, food imitates meat and dairy al- ternatives, sugar sweetened beverages or alcohol at any time point during their preparation.
competitors frequently used supplements over the course of contest preparation; these data are presented in table 5. the consumption of caffeine, fluids and number of meals a competitor consumed were com- pared between placed and dnp competitors. there was no statistically significant difference t 25 0.51, p 0.62 in daily caffeine consumption between males who placed 360 198 mg and dnp 283 153 mg.
there was also no difference t 13 0.80, p 0.44 in daily caffeine consumption between females who placed 277 158 mg and dnp 232 173 mg. mean daily caffeine consumption was 322 176 range 0 to 1384 mg and 252 161 range 0 to 618 mg mg per day for males and females respectively. fluid intake for males who placed and dnp place was 4.5 1.7 and 4.5 1.6 l per day, with no difference between the groups t 31 0.90, p 0.37.
in females the fluid consumption was 4.4 2.3 and 3.8 1.1 l per day, with no significant difference between the two groups t 14 0.61, p 0.55. mean consump- tion of fluids for males and females was 4.5 1.6 and 4.1 1.7 l per day respectively. the number of daily meals consumed by competitors was counted, there was a trend 2 5 2.40, p 0.10 for males who placed to consume more meals per day than those who dnp, 6.5 0.9 vs 5.9 1.1 respectively.
there was no significant difference 2 2 0.93, p 0.23 in the number of meals consumed per day between females who placed and dnp, 6.1 0.7 vs 6.7 0.8. the mean number of meals consumed per day was 6.2 1.0 and 6.4 0.8 for male and females respectively. of the 32 male competi- tors, 10 31.2 reported the consumption of cheat meals.
cheat meal consumption was less common amongst placed competitors with only 3 20.0 stating they used cheat meals, while 7 38.0 of dnp competi- tors reported consuming a cheat meal. a single placed competitor 5.0 reported utilising a refeed strategy. there was no difference in cheat meal consumption be- tween males who placed and dnp 2 2 2.82, p 0.28. of the 16 female competitors, 8 50.0 consumed a cheat meal during contest preparation.
reports of cheat meal consumption were less frequent amongst competitors who placed, 1 6.3 compared to those who dnp, 3 18.8, while 1 placed 6.3 competitor and 3 dnp 18.8 competitors specified employing refeed strategies. however there was no significant difference be- tween the groups 2 2 2.62, p 0.19. discussion this study is novel in providing insight on the nutri- tional strategies of high-level competitive natural bodybuilders.
although other studies have claimed to recruit high-level or elite natural bodybuilders, their definition of elite has been less stringent than the present investigation 3, 5.
we found no significant difference in dietary intake between the placed and table 2 macronutrient gkg bw and energy intake kcalkg bw of competitive bodybuilders during contest preparation: mean daily intake with standard deviations male female diet phase placed sd dnp sd mean sd placed sd dnp sd mean sd protein start 3.0 1.0 2.7 0.6 2.8 0.8 2.7 0.6 2.7 0.5 2.7 0.5 end 3.3 0.9 2.7 0.8 3.0 0.8 2.8 1.0 2.9 0.6 2.8 0.8 carbohydrate start 5.1 1.9 3.7 0.9 4.4 1.4 3.7 2.2 4.0 0.9 3.9 1.6 end 4.6 2.2 3.6 2.7 4.1 2.4 3.5 1.6 3.0 1.5 3.3 1.5 fat start 0.8 0.3 0.9 0.6 0.8 0.4 0.7 0.3 0.9 0.4 0.8 0.4 end 0.6 0.3 0.6 0.3 0.8 0.8 0.5 0.1 0.7 0.4 0.6 0.3 energy start 38.2 11.1 32.6 7.5 35.4 4.5 30.9 7.4 33.8 6.3 32.5 6.7 end 35.8 8.6 29.7 10.1 32.7 5.5 29.3 3.9 29.7 7.6 29.5 10.8 abbreviations: sd standard deviation, placed achieved top 5 of the competition, dnp did not place in top 5 of the competition chappell et al. journal of the international society of sports nutrition 2018 15:4 page 5 of 12 dnp competitors.
in spite of this null effect, results of practical significance testing suggest carbohydrate consumption in the early stages of contest prepar- ation may influence competitive outcome in the male bodybuilders. we also report that high level natural bodybuilders consume more energy, particularly from carbohydrate than previous accounts of natural body- builders 38.
as bodybuilders approached competi- tion, energy intake is reduced primarily through a reduction in carbohydrate and fat intake, with protein intake remaining constant throughout contest prepar- ation. accounts of body composition measurement show that bodybuilders often employ subjective methods to estimate bf 17. finally, we report on supplement and caffeine intake and note high con- sumption compared to publicly prescribed safety rec- ommendations for caffeine.
body composition and the fat free mass index skin callipers were the most commonly used methods for estimating bf amongst competitors, while subject- ive methods based on appearance were also reported. objective measurements of bf from competitive body- builders have been reported previously; these data sug- gest ranges from 4.1 to 10.9 and 8.6 to 11.3 in males and females respectively 2, 68, 1921.
interestingly in a sport concerned with achieving a low body fat, the majority of competitors did not report bf, with a proportion using visual methods to estimate bf. it is possible that the lack of reporting of bf may reflect a greater emphasis placed on the appearance of low body fat in bodybuilding rather than objectively obtained measures. a ffmi above 25 kgm2 is suggested as an upper limit for muscle accretion, without the use of aas 16.
this threshold, however, is based on photographic estimates table 3 total macronutrient intake of competitive bodybuilders during contest preparation: mean daily intake with standard deviations diet phase placed sd dnp sd mean sd p value time p value result p value time x result male protein total g per day start 254.0 92.7 232.3 52.3 242.4 73.4 middle 252.9 76.4 231.2 52.2 240.9 63.9 0.09 0.20 0.73 end 243.7 64.2 205.2 54.4 222.4 61.1 carbohydrate total g per day start 431.1 165.1 323.6 78.9 373.8 135.7 middle 392.8 142.5 288.0 106.5 335.0 132.6 0.01 0.14 0.51 end 340.6 156.5 268.6 185.0 300.8 173.7 fat total g per day start 64.7 26.0 75.8 48.7 70.6 39.5 middle 61.7 21.7 69.4 48.6 65.9 38.5 0.01 0.57 0.57 end 45.4 20.3 44.8 23.9 45.1 22.0 energy total kcal per day start 3214.8 1023.4 2824.6 587.5 3006.7 829.0 middle 3039.5 796.6 2629.9 575.6 2813.5 701.7 0.01 0.20 0.83 end 2660.6 571.3 2231.0 659.9 2423.6 648.4 female protein total g per day start 172.0 28.3 177.1 22.5 174.7 24.6 middle 168.3 34.1 166.3 24.7 167.2 28.4 0.93 0.63 0.56 end 150.9 44.1 166.8 29.3 159.3 36.5 carbohydrate total g per day start 243.7 155.5 274.0 66.0 259.9 113.1 middle 220.9 126.3 226.0 72.1 223.6 97.1 0.01 0.90 0.54 end 196.7 99.2 179.0 84.0 187.3 88.5 fat total g per day start 44.3 18.8 59.2 28.0 52.3 24.5 middle 44.1 19.2 52.7 19.7 48.7 19.3 0.02 0.17 0.64 end 28.6 6.1 44.0 22.0 36.8 17.9 energy total kcal per day start 2000.8 551.7 2269.0 423.5 2143.8 489.2 middle 1898.3 479.8 1986.7 405.1 1945.4 405.1 0.01 0.76 0.70 end 1598.9 256.8 1734.4 363.0 1671.1 363.0 p time, difference in means over time start, middle, end, p result, difference in means between place and dnp. time x result interaction between diet over time and result.
differences in macronutrients and energy measured by repeated measures anova. statistical significance assumed where p 0.05 abbreviations: sd standard deviation, placed achieved top 5 of the competition, dnp did not place in top 5 of the competition chappell et al. journal of the international society of sports nutrition 2018 15:4 page 6 of 12 of pre 1959 mr. america bodybuilders and the objective measurement of 157 gymnasium users so should be interpreted with some caution 17.
we provided an esti- mate of the mean ffmi based on competitors who re- ported bf using callipers of 22.7 kgm2, this is higher than the 21.8 kgm2 reported in the study of gymnasium users 16. interestingly, two male competitors in this study had a ffmi above the 25 kgm2, 25.73 and 25.15 kgm2 natural threshold based on the pre 1959 mr. america winners.
we did not measure ffm or bf directly and we acknowledge the limitations of self- reported accounts of bf; however, it is not inconceiv- able that there are high-level natural bodybuilders who exceed this theoretical ffmi 25.0 kgm2 threshold. the mean ffmi of 18.1 kgm2 reported in females was in agreement with previous estimates of 18.3 kgm2 21. but greater than that of a recent case report 6.
no ffmi upper threshold has been proposed for females; however, a ffmi between 19.0 to 20.0 kgm2 seems a reasonable objective starting point based on estimates of female populations 22. dietary intake energy intake as expected energy intake of male and female competitors was higher at the start of contest preparation compared to the end. similar findings have been reported in previous observations 13, 23, 24.
competitors reported reducing energy intake in stages over the course of their prepar- ation with smaller differences from the start to the middle and middle to end of the diet. similar strategies involving modest reductions in carbohydrate and fat consumption to facilitate weight loss has been reported elsewhere 4.
in contrast, two case studies of bodybuilders 5, 7 re- ported a reduction in energy intake between 882 to 1300 kcald from the start to the end of the competition preparation, compared to smaller reductions 554 kcald in our placed males. smaller reductions are intended to counteract metabolic adaptations to dieting, changes in energy requirements and preservation of lbm 11. both male and female competitors reported a high meal fre- quency.
this may reflect the practical aspects of consum- ing large volumes of food combined with and belief that multiple meals may preserve more lbm, while contribut- ing to greater appetite control 2527. research indicates greater lbm preservation and exer- cise performance with slower versus faster weight loss, a 0.5 to 1 of bw per week is recommended for natural bodybuilding 10, 28.
our cohort reporting dieting for on average 24.9 and 23.3 weeks in males and females table 4 percentage food group intake of competitive bodybuilders during contest preparation cereals and cereal based products nuts, oilseeds and legumes meat and meat products animal and veg fats and oils diet phase cereals bread dairy veg tubers nuts and seeds legumes white red processed fruit eggs marine veg animal sugar other male start 17.7 0.4 15.2 11.3 9.5 10.0 0.0 9.1 3.9 1.3 7.4 5.2 4.3 2.6 0.9 0.0 0.9 middle 17.6 0.0 11.9 11.4 11.4 9.3 0.0 9.3 3.6 0.0 7.3 5.7 8.3 2.1 0.5 0.0 1.0 end 15.3 0.5 14.7 15.3 10.5 6.8 0.0 9.5 2.1 0.0 8.4 6.3 7.4 2.1 0.5 0.0 0.0 female start 22.0 2.5 13.6 16.1 10.2 6.8 0.0 8.5 3.4 0.0 5.9 3.4 5.9 0.9 0.0 0.9 0.0 middle 18.9 1.9 11.3 15.1 8.5 9.4 0.0 5.7 2.8 0.0 9.4 6.6 8.5 0.9 0.0 0.9 0.0 end 19.8 1.9 13.2 13.2 12.3 6.6 0.0 9.4 0.9 0.0 5.7 6.6 8.5 0.9 0.0 0.9 0.0 dairy products includes whey and a casein supplements, processed meats include sausages, bacon, pies meat pastries etc., fruit includes fruit products, eggs includes egg products including egg protein isolate, marine, includes fish, seafood, amphibians reptiles and invertebrates.
sugar includes confectionary and water- based sweet desserts abbreviations: veg vegetable table 5 supplement usage of competitive bodybuilders during contest preparation: mean daily intake with standard deviations male sd female sd mean number of supplements used 7.0 0.8 5.4 3.2 protein powder 75.0 11.8 88.9 15.7 multivitamin 53.3 28.3 60.0 14.1 bcaa supplement 49.4 14.9 53.5 12.8 creatine supplement 48.3 2.4 50.8 9.0 fat burners 47.8 11.0 36.5 11.2 individual amino 42.2 3.1 31.0 3.3 pre-workout 42.2 3.1 19.9 12.4 omega 3 39.4 0.8 46.6 12.8 carb supplement 36.7 4.7 0.0 0.0 mineral or joint supplement 27.2 0.8 31.0 3.3 vitamin c 23.9 5.5 28.5 22.6 vitamin d 21.1 1.6 11.1 15.7 miscellaneous supplement 42.8 5.5 5.6 7.8 values expressed as a percentage of the population who utilised a particular supplement.
miscellaneous supplement, supplements that were used too infrequently to be designated as a category abbreviations: sd standard deviation, bcaa branch chain amino acids chappell et al. journal of the international society of sports nutrition 2018 15:4 page 7 of 12 respectively, compared to 14 weeks in the study by robin- son et al. 5, and 26 weeks in both rossow et al. 3 and kister et al. 4 studies.
the weekly weight loss in the present study was estimated to be 0.46 per week in the placed males, compared to 0.5 3, 0.7 4 and 1.0 5 in case studies. fascinatingly, petrizzo et al. 7 recently ad- vocated weight loss of 0.5 bw per week for lbm preser- vation during natural bodybuilding contest preparation.
in the present investigation, weight loss was 0.46 per week reflecting this recommendation; it seems likely that slower weight lost in our placed males may have resulted in greater preservation of lbm than the dnp males. macronutrients carbohydrate carbohydrate was the most abundant macronutrient con- sumed across all the phases of the diet, in both male and female competitors. the majority of carbohydrates came from cereals, tubers, fruit, and vegetables.
confectionary items, such as sweets and water-based desserts, legumes and bread were consumed sparingly during contest prepa- rations in agreement with previous accounts of bodybuild- ing menus 5, 7, 29. carbohydrate intake was reduced from the start to the end of contest preparation reflecting the practice seen in bodybuilding case studies 35. carbohydrate intake amongst placed males 5.1 gkg bw was similar to a meta-analysis of contest preparation bodybuilders 4.9 gkg bw 13.
however, intake was higher amongst placed male competitors in the weeks pre- ceding the competition end of the diet, 4.6 gkg bw compared to previous reports 3.8 gkg bw 13. intake was also higher for male competitors compared to three recent case studies, where mean intakes were between 2.5 to 3.0 gkg bw over 26 and 28 weeks 3, 4, and 1.2 to 1.4 gkg bw over 14 weeks 5.
carbohydrate energy in the female cohort placed and dnp start of diet: 3.7 and 4.0 gkg bw, was higher than two case studies 3.4 gkg bw 6 and 1.5 to 1.9 gkg bw 7 and a meta-analysis conducted on studies reporting intake amongst female bodybuilders over 30 years ago 3.1 g kg bw 13. higher intakes have been reported in a recent case report of a dieting female physique competitor where intake was initially 5.0 gkg bw 8 before decreasing to 1.8 gkg bw by the end of the 6 month study period.
intakes of 5.0 gkg bw have been reported in the final week of contest preparation, 13 which may reflect carbohydrate loading strategies in the final week of competition. carbohydrate intake amongst the placed males 4.6 to 5.1 gkg bw was in line with previous recommenda- tions of 47 gkg bw for bodybuilders aiming to main- tain weight 30. cohens d effect size testing indicated carbohydrate intake at the start of the diet may have some impact on competitive outcome.
placed males consumed 1.0 to 1.4 gkg bw more carbohydrate than those who dnp during this period. this equates to an additional 75 to 97.5 g carbohydrate 281.2 to 365.6 kcal per day in a 75 kg male. this additional carbohydrate is a non-trivial amount as even modest resistance training protocols can deplete muscle glycogen concentrations between 24 to 82 31, 32. furthermore, as little as 15 g of carbohydrate consumed during resistance train-
ing may increase performance in hypertrophy rep ranges 33. finally, the effect of isometric contractions on bodybuilders muscle glycogen concentrations should be considered. bodybuilders routinely hold isometric con- tractions for between 6 to 60s for 10 to 30 min in prep- aration for competition 8. by way of comparison 10 min of isometric exercise at 20 of maximum volun- tary contraction for 10 s, with 10 s rest intervals can se- verely deplete muscle glycogen in type 1 fibres 34.
an adequate carbohydrate intake during contest preparation to maintain muscle glycogen should therefore be an im- portant consideration for the natural bodybuilder. low carbohydrate diets are effective for weight loss, however they may result in a disproportionate loss of lbm 3538. an example of this can be seen in the study by robinson et al. 5 where the athletes lost 43 of their lbm following a low carbohydrate diet.
while higher carbohydrate diets utilised by other bodybuilding case studies resulted in smaller lbm loss, 21 and 32 3, 4. multiple factors could have contribute to the lbm loss seen in robinson et al. 5, however recent cri- tiques have suggested more prudent dietary strategies should be employed for natural bodybuilding 7, 39.
interestingly, the two female athletes involved in the petzzaro et al. 7 and rohrig et al. 8 case reports in- creased lbm and reduced fat mass in despite following a similar dietary approach to robinson et al. 5. with the exception of a case report which tracked the body composition of 6 physique athletes 4 male, 2 female using aas 40 increases in lbm and a reductions in fat mass amongst bodybuilders during contest preparations have been previously unreported 1, 36, 21, 4143.
in spite of this finding evidently, there may be a threshold for carbohydrate intake, after which there is an increase in the rate of lbm loss regardless of protein intake or resistance training. protein protein constituted between 32.0 to 40.0 of total energy in both male and female competitors diets in the present study in line with previously reported data 12.
the main protein sources were from dairy, white meat, nuts and sea- food in agreement with data from previous bodybuilding studies 5, 6, 29. the high intake of protein from dairy re- flects the prominence of protein powder in competitors diets. red meat and eggs were consumed to a lesser extent chappell et al. journal of the international society of sports nutrition 2018 15:4 page 8 of 12 than the aforementioned foods options.
protein intakes were between 2.7 gkg bw and 3.3 gkg bw amongst male and female competitors, similar to reports from case studies 2.2 to 3.5 gkg bw 38. the prioritisation of protein over other macronutri- ents during energy restriction is common practice amongst bodybuilders 38, 40. high protein diets are known to spare lbm during energy deficits 4346, maintain nitrogen balance and stimulate muscle protein synthesis mps 47.
protein is also satiating, which may improve dietary adherence during energy restriction 45. protein digestion is also known to have the greatest thermic effect of the three macronutrients. approxi- mately 20 to 30 of net energy is lost through dietary thermogenesis of protein compared to around 3 for fat; this extra thermic effect may contribute to add- itional weight loss 36, 45.
protein intake recommendations for strength-trained athletes during energy restriction are 2.0 gkg bw, with 0.25 to 0.3 gkg bw during the early recovery phase after exercise 48. however, a recent systematic review has recommended higher levels of between 2.3 to 3.1 gkg bw of lbm during severe calorie restriction 49, al- though this recommendation was based on only two em- pirical studies 36, 43.
nevertheless it seems likely that protein intake amongst the competitors in this study was adequate for the preservation of lbm. this additional protein may be advantageous exploiting the thermic effect of food and satiation offered by additional pro- tein. however, a recent experimental study found that additional protein energy was not realised in changes in body composition 37, 50.
fat fat intake was the lowest amongst the three macronutri- ents, and like carbohydrate was reduced over time in favour of maintaining protein. there was a tendency for competitors in this cohort to favour low-fat diets. food selection patterns emphasised this with oils and red and processed meats making up only a small percentage of the cohorts overall diet. although eggs were commonly consumed, the yolks were routinely discarded.
nuts and seeds, along with white meats, marine and cereals were the most prominent sources of fat in the athletes diet. moreover, many athletes reported consuming an omega- 3 fatty acid supplement, suggesting athletes favouring a diet higher in mono- and polyunsaturated fatty acids ra- ther than saturates. low fat food selection patterns have previously been reported 29.
the fat intakes recorded in the present study start of diet: males 0.8 gkg bw, females 0.8 gkg bw were simi- lar to previous accounts reported by spendlove et al. 13 for male 0.95 g kg bw but higher than previous reports of female competitive bodybuilders 0.32 g kg bw. despite the seemingly low fat intake accounts as low as 8 of energy have been reported in the bodybuilding lit- erature 51, 52.
bodybuilders in the present study placed nutrients in a hierarchy, prioritising protein followed by carbohydrate for the aforementioned reasons. low fat di- ets have however been cited to reduce testosterone con- centrations during a calorie deficit 53, 54. however, in a 11 week study of bodybuilders dieting for competition, plasma testosterone and igf-1 concentrations decreased, despite subjects consuming a relatively high fat intake en- ergy 25 or 1.18 g kg bw 43.
differentiating between the effects of fat and energy intake on hormone concen- trations is clearly a challenge. the intakes recorded in this study in conjunction with high protein and high carbohy- drate diets may therefore merit further investigation. finally, the low fat intakes seen here may reflect a paradigm shift between the present day, and the 1980s and 90s where the majority observational stud- ies of bodybuilders were performed 13.
likewise the results reported here may also reflect a difference in approach between british and american bodybuilders, with all six recent case studies opted for a higher fat approach 38. supplementation and caffeine intake male and female competitors routinely consumed be- tween 5 and 7 supplements during contest preparation.
protein powders, multivitamins, bcaa and creatine were the most commonly consumed supplements in agreement with previous observations of gymnasium users, athletes and bodybuilders 5557. whey protein was routinely consumed at breakfast and post resistance training. in contrast, casein-based supplements were commonly con- sumed as the last meal of the day. the use of protein in this manner suggests nutrient timing strategies, the effect- iveness of which has been called into question 58.
branch chain amino acids are used as means of maximally stimulating mps over the course of the day by providing a bolus dose of bcaa every few hours along with or be- tween meals, for the preservation of lbm in what is com- monly referred to as a pulsing strategy 47. however when the muscle full effect is considered, the use of bcaa as part of a high protein diet may offer little if any additional stimulation of mps 59.
moreover, the daily doses of bcaa 30 g and beta-hydroxy-beta-methylbuty- rate 2 g, consumed by the athletes in the kistler et al. 4 case study failed to prevent a greater loss of lbm com- pared to rossow et al. 3. specialist fat burning and pre-exercise supplements were also popular amongst this cohort.
pre-exercise sup- plements often contained combinations of vitamins, minerals, amino acids, creatine, caffeine and lactate buffers usually in the form of beta alanine, citrulline malate and arginine. the efficacy of these individual chappell et al. journal of the international society of sports nutrition 2018 15:4 page 9 of 12 ingredients have been reviewed for natural bodybuilding 11; however, their use in combination is largely un- known.
in addition, because caffeine is a prominent in- gredient in many of these supplements, competitors should consider the contribution these supplements make to their caffeine intake. this point is particularly pertinent when considering competitors may often con- sume large amounts of energy drinks and hot beverages 57. indeed, several competitors exceeded the 400 mg per day safety consumption limits specified by the european food safety agency for caffeine.
although these consumption limits are based on a 70 kg individ- ual, competitors should be aware that intakes above 9 mg kg bw may be ergolytic as well as having unin- tended side effects 60, 61. limitations there are limitations with the method used to assess dietary intake, under-reporting of habitual dietary en- ergy intake is estimated to be between 18 to 54 in non-bodybuilding populations 62. in particular carbo- hydrates tend to be under-reported, while protein in- take over reported 62.
likewise, foods that portray a negative health image such as confectionary are often under reported while foods that portray a positive health image such as fruits and vegetables are over re- ported 62. the prevalence of under- or over reporting within bodybuilding population is unknown, however bodybuilders are known for their strict adherence to dietary plans 38. the dietary recall only incorporated a single days intake at three arbitrary time points.
as a result, competitors largely reported their dietary intake for training days, while intake on non-training days is likely to be lower. this bias likely resulted in inflated values for energy intake, furthermore strategies such as carbohydrate and calorie cycling were likely missed by the single day recall method. despite the limitations of the method used to capture dietary intake we were able to detect a reduction of energy intake over time.
more- over, a single days intake may have led to misclassifica- tion of dietary diversity, although the diet diversity scores are agreement with previous accounts of body- building menus. the bf values used to estimate the ffmi of competi- tors are based on self-reported accounts using skin calli- pers. competitors did not report if these skinfold test were carried out by trained professionals.
although, the values reported were plausible essentially they match with the values reported elsewhere amongst competitive bodybuilders taken form objective measures for com- petitors competing in a national competition, we omit- ted to include them in the report along with the subjectively obtain values as they should not be regarded as accurate.
conclusions the cross-sectional nature of this study makes it difficult to draw any definitive conclusion on what may be the best dietary approaches for contest preparation in nat- ural bodybuilders. our questionnaire was limited in scope and there are multiple variables that likely influ- ence competitive outcome. likewise, the sample size may have reduced our ability to detect statistical signifi- cance. in spite of these limitations, our study is distinct-
ive in its applied nature attempting to correlate cross sectional data with competition outcome. the findings of this study required corroboration, and should be interpreting with caution. however, it is likely our find- ings will be of interest to pre-competition bodybuilders and those seeking to reduce fat mass while maintaining lbm who may wish to know strategies employed by bodybuilders in the placed cohort of a high level national bodybuilding competition.
this study also provides a contemporary account of current bodybuilding practices and provides additional evidence for the formation of research informed ap- proaches to natural bodybuilding contest preparation. future studies should focus on the use of standardizes body composition measurement techniques to assess changes in ffm during contest preparation. further- more, beyond case studies the literature is lacking in longitudinal studies of competitive bodybuilders.
larger scale longitudinal studies of competitive natural body- builders using with frequent sampling points would be of value to researchers in this field. additional file additional file 1: dietary assessment questionnaire used to carry out this research. pdf 242 kb additional file 2: dietary intake of competitors adjusted for bodyweight expressed as medians and interquartile ranges.
pdf 815 kb acknowledgements the author would like to thank the participants for providing their time and effort to complete this study as well as the british natural bodybuilding federation. funding no funding was received for this study availability of data and materials please contact author for data requests authors contributions ac conceived the study. ac and ts participated in the design of the study. ac carried out the data collection, nutritional and statistical analysis.
ac, ts and mb helped to draft the manuscript. all authors approved the final manuscript. ethics approval and consent to participate this investigation had prior ethical approval by the sheffield hallam university school of business committee. chappell et al. journal of the international society of sports nutrition 2018 15:4 page 10 of 12 consent for publication not applicable. competing interests the authors declare that they have no competing interests.
publishers note springer nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations. received: 28 july 2017 accepted: 9 january 2018
 montuori et al.
bmc sports science, medicine and rehabilitation 2021 13:147 https:doi.org10.1186s13102-021-00378-x research bodybuilding, dietary supplements and hormones use: behaviour and determinant analysis in young bodybuilders paolo montuori, ilaria loperto, carmine paolo, davide castrianni, raffaele nubi, elvira de rosa, raffaele palladino and maria triassi abstract background: among athletes, bodybuilders are more predisposed to the use of dietary supplements ds and hor- mones h to increase in adaptations to physical training and performance.
the purpose of the study was to identify social, psychological, and organisational factors that are associated with the use of food supplements and hormones in young bodybuilders of the metropolitan area of naples. methods: 107 athletes, practicing bodybuilding, were consecutively recruited in 30 gyms, randomly selected in the metropolitan area of naples. athletes were administered an anonymous questionnaire.
the questionnaire consists of 5 sections socio-demographic, frequency and reasons for bodybuilding, knowledge, attitudes and behaviours. descriptive statistics were performed using t-test and chi-square statistics. a score was created for knowledge, atti- tudes, behaviours. multivariable logistic regression models were employed to assess association between each score and the use of ds and h. statistical analyses were carried out using stata 15.
results: 81.31 of the subjects reported to use ds while 35.51 h. females are less likely to practise bodybuilding frequently than males or 0.18 95 ci 0.050.69, p 0.01. subjects who have attended high school or university have a lower probability of taking ds or 0.17 95 ci 0.040.65, p 0.01. h users also use supplements more frequently or 61.21 95 ci 3.99939.31, p 0.001. those who scored higher on knowledge scores are more likely to take ds or 1.53 95 ci 1.112.12, p 0.001.
attitudes are correlated with the use of ds; those who scored higher were less likely to use ds or 0.77 95 ci 0.300.98, p 0.03. people who use ds are 30 times more likely to use h at the same time or 30.25 95 ci 2.51365.24, p 0.001. subjects who have a higher score for knowledge and attitudes are less likely to use h or 0.68 95 ci 0.540.87, p 0.001, or 0.75 95 ci 0.620.90, p 0.001.
conclusions: prevalence of h and ds use, although lower than reported in the literature, is a worrying public health problem. better knowledge can lead to an informed use. gym instructors should be trained to provide accurate and scientifically sound information. health professionals should combine their expertise to provide more comprehensive guidance to the exercisers. keywords: dietary supplements, bodybuilding, athletes, diet, gyms the authors 2021.
open access this article is licensed under a creative commons attribution 4.0 international license, which permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give appropriate credit to the original authors and the source, provide a link to the creative commons licence, and indicate if changes were made.
the images or other third party material in this article are included in the articles creative commons licence, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. if material is not included in the articles creative commons licence and your intended use is not permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder. to view a copy of this licence, visit http:creativecommons.orglicensesby4.0.
the creative commons public domain dedication waiver http:creativeco mmons.orgpublicdomainzero1.0 applies to the data made available in this article, unless otherwise stated in a credit line to the data. background bodybuilding is a sport in which the athlete is judged on muscular appearance.
proper preparation for a body- building contest generally involves years of strength training followed by a phase in which the athlete focuses open access correspondence: ilaria.lopertogmail.com paolo montuori and ilaria loperto these two authors contributed equally department of public health, university of naples federico ii, via s. pansini, 5, 80131 naples, italy page 2 of 11 montuori et al.
bmc sports science, medicine and rehabilitation 2021 13:147 on drastically reducing body fat to improve muscle appearance 1, 2.. bodybuildings training programs are characterized by a separation of training into four dis- tinct periods: off-season, pre-contest, peak week, and post-contest. each period has a specific spectrum of intensity load, total training volume, and exercise type multi- or single-joint 3.
the bodybuilders goal is to develop muscular hypertrophy and to obtain low fat levels based on a balanced body shape 2. since energy restriction prior to competition has a negative effect on anabolic hormones, it can result in a reduction in serum concentrations of hormones such as testosterone, insulin-like growth factor-1 igf-1 and insulin 4. so among athletes, bodybuilders are more predisposed to the use of dietary supplements ds and hormones h as compared to other sportsmen 4.
the aim of the con- sumption of these substances is the increase in adapta- tions to physical training and physical performance. in addition to friends and family, advertisements through media were the main source of information on supple- ment use; very few obtained informationadvice from their physicians 5. the most common ds currently used are vitamins, minerals, protein powdersliquid, and amino acids 6.
the use of ds is also a risk factor for illicit substance use and may cause so-called inadvert- ent doping due to the contamination of their ingredients with, for example, oxilofrine, -methylphenethylamine bmpea and n,-dimethylphenethylamine nbdm- pea, the stimulant 4-methylhexan-2-amine methylhex- aneamine, 1,3-dimethylamylamine, dmaa, the anabolic steroids boldione 1,4-androstadiene-3,17-dione and 5-androstene-3,17-diol 17-aed, the beta-2 agonist higenamine and the beta-blocker bisoprolol 7, 8.
however, the exact health benefits ds are still not well established 9, 10. moreover, various possible hazards were described when used inappropriately or without medical consultation 11. in italy, a medical prescription is not required for natu- ral health products so ds are easily available for self-care and self-selection. the main eu rules concerning food supplements is directive 200246ec 12.
since an excessive intake can cause undesirable effects 1317, the directive provides for the establishment of maximum amounts of vitamins and minerals to be added to food supplements. in italy, in addition to the transposition of these directives leg- islative decree no.
169 of 21 may 2004 and subsequent amendments 18, in order to ensure an adequate level of quality and safety of dietary supplements, the ministry of health published in november 2018 the recommen- dations on the good manufacturing practices of food sup- plements, aimed at providing technical indications that meet the specific needs of the manufacturing industries 19. at the present time, ds that have as ingredients the substances allowed by the legislation can be placed on the market.
if this condition does not occur, it is neces- sary to request an ad hoc authorization, based solely on the demonstration of safety of use, as governed by eu regulation 20152283 on novel foods 20. at the same time, it should be emphasized that for the placing on the market of a substance such as ds andor ingredient of a ds, no proof of efficacy is required. about 50 of the general population and up to 100 of athletes in some sports have reported taking dietary sup- plement 11, 21.
in a recent study on spanish bodybuild- ers, 100 of subjects reported consuming ds 4. although many mechanisms of action in improving performance have been proposed for ds, there are few studies that demonstrate real efficacy.
for example, very high intakes of arginine may increase exercise-induced human growth hormone hgh release, but this does not correspond to an objective increase in sports perfor- mance; carnitine should improve skeletal muscle func- tion but there is no evidence that carnitine improves physical performance in healthy subjects 22. also, cre- atine is a popular supplement for elevating energy during short, high-intensity exercises 23.
several studies have indicated adverse effects of dietary supplements consumption, including cardiovascular, hematological, metabolic, and neurological problems 14, 22. despite the availability of wide information about supplement utilization from different parts of the world, limited data is available from italy.
sometimes bodybuilders use banned substances such as diuretics, stimulants, or anabolic substances, included in the list of prohibited methods and substances pub- lished by the world anti-doping agency wada 24. previous reports that have analyzed the prevalence of use of anabolic steroids suggest polypharmacy and high doses of injectable agents 25. nandrolone decanoate and sustanon, a combination product of 4 testosterone esters, were the most commonly reportedly used agents 25.
the use of prohibited substances is estimated to be 15 in the general population, reaching up to 50 in some sports 26, 27. the use of doping agents has become a public health problem as it also affects young and non-professional athletes 28. however, there are objective health risks including cardiovascular illnesses, diabetes, cancer, men- tal health problems, virilization in women and the sup- pression of the androgens produced naturally in men 26.
given that bodybuilders are an high risk category of ds and h consumption and that studies carried out in italy in this population are lacking, our purpose was to iden- tify the social, psychological, and organisational factors page 3 of 11 montuori et al. bmc sports science, medicine and rehabilitation 2021 13:147 that are associated with the use of food supplements and hormones in young bodybuilders of the metropolitan area of naples.
methods study design and setting a cross-sectional analysis of data from 107 athletes, prac- ticing bodybuilding, recruited from 30 gyms, randomly selected in the metropolitan area of naples, has been performed. inclusion criteria for the gyms were to be located in naples provinces and have at least one body- building course held by a bodybuilding instructor with a technical card recognized by coni italian national olympic committee.
for each gym, all subjects enrolled in bodybuilding courses, aged over 18 years and able to understand every item of the questionnaire were eligible, with no regard to sex, skin color, class, or social group.
in italy, the fipe italian weightlifting federation federal council decided to assimilate the contents of resolution no.1568 of 14 february 2017 of the national council of coni about the authentic interpretation of the definition of "activities with overloads and resistances aimed at fit- ness and physical well-being" specified below: physical culture bodybuilding includes all those activities that use any form of load or resistance to achieve the goal in terms of sports competitive and non-competitive, conditioning fitness also aimed at competitive perfor- mance, well-being wellness and recovery of physical efficiency 29.
for this reason, both professional and non-professional athletes, both competing bodybuilders and amateur bodybuilders have been enrolled. no sample size calculation was performed because data on the total number of athletes practicing bodybuilders in the area was not possible to retrieve. however, our study popula- tion size is comparable to study populations from previ- ous studies on the topic conducted in similar settings 4, 30.
informed consent was obtained from each partici- pant, the project was approved by the ethics committee of medical school of the university federico ii and all methods were carried out in accordance with relevant guidelines and regulations. study population and study variables athletes were administered an anonymous paper ques- tionnaire.
each participant was instructed on how to fill in the questionnaire, providing a list of the most frequently used ds and h with the commercial name and defining some variables.
in particular, it was speci- fied that for the reason for bodybuilding variable, the answer "other reasons" included "improve health", "lose weight", "increase strength", "participate in com- petitions"; while for the "bodybuilding frequency" vari- able, the "seldomly" response included the subjects who practice less than 3 workouts a week and to the "fre- quently" group all the others.
the questionnaire see additional file 1, which was mirrored on existing ques- tionnaires and adapted 3133, consists of 58 questions focusing on bodybuilding, supplements and hormones. the questionnaire consists of 5 sections. the first sect. 6 questions asks socio-demographic information while the second one 5 questions asks information about fre- quency and reasons for bodybuilding. the third sect.
11 questions, concerning knowledge, and the fourth 16 questions, concerning attitudes, were assessed on a three-point likert scale agree, uncertain and disagree while the fifth sect. 20 questions, concerning behav- iours, is based on a 4-degree scale yes, often, sometimes, never. for each section, using a likert scale, a score ranging from 1 to 3 or from 1 to 4 was created.
for the "knowledge" and "behaviours" sections, the highest score was attributed to the correct answer or to the healthier behaviour, while for the "attitudes" the higher score was attributed to the attitude that could lead to healthier behavior. the questionnaire underwent an internal vali- dation, was pre-tested and modifications were been made to improve validity of responses.
specifically, the ques- tionnaire was administered to 20 public health trainees based at the department of public health to discuss clar- ity of the questions. the following information from the survey was included in the following study: age, sex, weight, height, education attainment, employment status, reasons for bodybuilding, frequency of bodybuilding, duration of practice, use of supplements, use of hormones, smoke habits, knowledge, attitude and behaviours scores.
as regards education attainment, the italian school system is structured in three cycles of education: primary edu- cation, which includes primary school, lasting five years; secondary education, which includes a three-year lower secondary school, and a five-year high school. statistical analysis descriptive statistics of the study variables were per- formed using t-test, chi-square and fishers exact test statistics, as appropriate.
for the multivariable analyses, a score was created for each section knowledge, attitudes, behaviours. multivariable logistic regression models were employed to assess the association between each score and the use of supplements and hormones. four binary outcome variables were selected: body- building frequency seldomly, frequently, bodybuilding reasons other reasons, improve body look, use of sup- plements, use of hormones.
models were adjusted for age, gender, bmi, education attainment, employment, smoking and the remaining outcome variables. statistical analyses were carried out using stata 15. page 4 of 11 montuori et al. bmc sports science, medicine and rehabilitation 2021 13:147 results of the 107 participants, 68 are male and 32 are female. 81.31 of the subjects reported to use sup- plements while 35.51 hormones.
table 1 shows the characteristics of the patients divided by use of supple- ments, hormones, and by gender. 81.31 of the athletes declared to use supplements. 65.52 of the subjects who use supplements are male while only the 34.48 are female. the majority of sub- jects who use supplements 55.17 completed the high school while the percentages regarding employment status are very similar: 32.18 are unemployed, 36.78 are employed, 31.03 are self-employed.
63.22 of the subjects who use supplements practice bodybuilding for aesthetic reasons, 75.86 declare to practice it fre- quently while 51.72 declare that they have been train- ing for less than 5 years. for these variables, there is no difference between the group that uses supplements and the one that does not use them p 0.05. the aver- age age of those who use supplements is lower than those who do not use them 31.13 vs 34.45, p 0.048.
the 42.53 of subjects who use supplements say they also use hormones p 0.002. 35.51 of the interviewed subjects declared to use hormones. of these, 71.05 are male and only 28.05 are female. the average age of hormone users is 32.42 and there is no difference with that of non-users 31.37, p ns.
as for supplements, even in the case of hor- mones, those who use them have more frequently a high school diploma 50.00, while as regards employ- ment status, the distribution is very similar in the three groups unemployed: 31.58; employed: 36.84; self- employed: 31.58, p ns. most people who use hor- mones practice bodybuilding to improve body look 57.89, 76.32 train frequently and 47.37 declare to practice bodybuilding for more than 5 years.
for the use of hormones, there is no difference in the two groups for any variable p 0.05. it is interesting to note that those who use hormones also tend to use supplements at the same time 97.37, p 0.002. on average, females have a higher level of education than males p 0.045, while males tend to train more frequently p 0.029. for the other variables consid- ered, there is no statistically significant difference.
as shown in table 2, female subjects are less likely to practise bodybuilding frequently than male subjects fully adjusted modelor 0.18 95 ci 0.050.69, p 0.01. for the "bodybuilding frequency" outcome variable, no other statistically significant association was found. for the "bodybuilding reason" outcome variable, no variable considered was associated in any of the con- structed models table 3.
as shown in table 4, compared to those with a mid- dle school diploma, subjects who have attended high school or university have a lower probability of tak- ing supplements fully adjusted modelor 0.17 95 ci 0.040.65, p 0.01. hormone users also use sup- plements more frequently fully adjusted modelor 61.21 95 ci 3.99939.31, p 0.001. in addition, those who scored higher on knowledge scores are more likely to take supplements fully adjusted modelor 1.53 95 ci 1.112.12, p 0.001.
only in the fully adjusted model, attitudes are correlated with the use of supple- ments; those who scored higher were less likely to use supplements fully adjusted modelor 0.77 95 ci 0.300.98, p 0.03. finally, table 5 shows the associations between hor- mone intake and the other variables taken into consid- eration. people who use supplements are 30 times more likely to use hormones at the same time fully adjusted modelor 30.25 95 ci 2.51365.24, p 0.001.
sub- jects who have a higher score for knowledge and attitudes are less likely to use hormones fully adjusted model or 0.68 95 ci 0.540.87, p 0.001, or 0.75 95 ci 0.620.90, p 0.001. as far as the source of information is concerned, it is interesting to note that for ds 83.18 of subjects declare to inquire at the gym, 71.03 on the internet and 64.49 from their doctornutritionist.
for h, on the other hand, 42.45 of subjects declare to obtain information in the gym, 25.23 on the internet, 38.22 from their doctor nutritionist data not shown. discussion the hypotheses tested in the present research concern the possibility that the basic knowledge of bodybuilders influences the use of ds and h. if this is true in profes- sional bodybuilders, it is interesting to know whether in a mixed population of professional and non-professional bodybuilders, this phenomenon occurs.
if this were the case, in fact, the phenomenon could be conditioned with health education interventions. in the present study, 81.31 of the subjects reported to use supplements while 35.51 hormones. subjects who have attended high school or university have a lower probability of taking supplements, while hormone users also use supplements more frequently.
in addition, those who scored higher on knowledge scores are more likely to take supplements; instead, those who scored higher on attitude scores were less likely to use supplements. finally, people who use supplements are 30 times more likely to use hormones at the same time and subjects who page 5 of 11 montuori et al.
bmc sports science, medicine and rehabilitation 2021 13:147 table 1 patient characteristics by supplements use, hormone use and sex statistically significant p values 0.05 are in bold t test chi square test fishers exact test supplements use hormones use sex no yes p no
yes p m f p n 20 18.69 87 81.31 69 64.49 38 35.51 73 68.22 34 31.78 sex, n male 16 80.00 57 65.52 0.210 46 66.67 27 71.05 0.641 female 4 20.00 30 34.48 23 33.33 11 28.95 age, mean sd 34.45 10.22 31.13 7.40 0.048 31.37 8.65 32.42 6.90 0.738 32.09 7.82 31 8.62 0.26 education attainment, n up to secondary school 1 5.00 24 27.59 0.096 14 20.29 11 28.95 0.449 19 26.03 6 17.65 0.045 high-school 14 70.00 48 55.17 43 62.32 19 50.00 45 61.64 17 50.00 bachelor degree and above 5 25.00 15 17.24 12 17.39 8 21.05 9 12.33 11 32.35 employment status, n unemployedothers 4 20.00 28 32.18 0.464 20 28.99 12 31.58 0.926 18 24.66 14 41.18 0.220 employed 10 50.00 32 36.78 28 40.58 14 36.84 31 42.47 11 32.35 self-employed 6 30.00 27 31.03 21 30.43 12 31.58 24 32.88 9 26.47 reason for bodybuilding, n other reason 10 50.00 32 36.78 0.275 26 37.68 16 42.11 0.654 26 53.62 16 47.06 0.259 improve body look 10 50.00 55
63.22 43 62.32 22 57.89 47 64.38 18 52.94 frequency of bodybuilding, n seldomly 3 15.00 21 24.14 0.377 15 21.74 9 23.68 0.817 12 16.44 12 35.29 0.029 frequently 17 85.00 66 75.86 54 78.26 29 76.32 61 83.56 22 64.71 duration of bodybuilding, n less than a year 2 10.00 10 11.49 0.793 8 11.59 4 10.53 0.350 5 6.85 7 20.59 0.106 less than five years 9 45.00 45 51.72 38 55.07 16 42.11 38 52.05 16 47.06 more than five years 9 45.00 32 36.78 23 33.33 18 47.37 30 41.10 11 32.35 hormones, n 1 5.00 37 42.53 0.002 27 36.99 11 32.35 0.641 supplements, n 50 72.46 37 97.37 0.002 57 78.08 30 88.24 0.210 page 6 of 11 montuori et
al.
bmc sports science, medicine and rehabilitation 2021 13:147 table 2 association between knowledge, attitudes, and behaviour and bodybuilding frequency x, y statistically significant p values 0.05 are in bold estimates were derived from multivariable logistic regression models adjusted for age, gender, bmi, education attainment, employment, smoking and the remaining outcome variables partially adjusted model 1 partially adjusted model 2 partially adjusted model 3 partially adjusted model 4 fully adjusted model or 95 ci p or 95 ci p or 95 ci p or 95 ci p or 95 ci p age 1.08 1.01 1.17 0.04 1.07 0.99 1.15 0.06 1.07 0.99 1.15 0.07 1.07 1.00 1.16 0.06 1.07 0.99 1.15 0.09 sex f 0.22 0.07 0.95 0.04 0.23 0.07 0.80 0.02 0.17 0.05 0.65 0.01 0.22 0.06 0.75 0.02 0.18 0.05 0.68 0.01 bmi 0.88 0.71 1.08 0.22 0.85 0.70 1.05 0.13 0.82 0.66 1.01 0.07 0.85 0.69 1.04 0.12 0.82 0.66 1.02 0.08 education attainment 1.13 0.52 2.46 0.32 1.11 0.51 2.43 0.79 1.28 0.57 2.84 0.60 1.14 0.52 2.47 0.74 1.24 0.55 2.78 0.61 employment status 1.15 0.61 2.17 0.42 1.10 0.58 2.11 0.77 1.18 0.62 2.27 0.61 1.14 0.60 2.17 0.68 1.15 0.59 2.24 0.68 smoke 0.81 0.43 1.49 0.49 0.80 0.43 1.51 0.50 0.81 0.43 1.51 0.50 0.80 0.43 1.49 0.49 0.80 0.42 1.52 0.50 supplements use 0.82 0.18 3.61 0.79 0.76 0.17 3.42 0.72 0.65 0.14 3.01 0.58 0.83 0.19 3.66 0.80 0.57 0.12 2.71 0.48 hormones use 0.92 0.31 2.70 0.90 1.06 0.32 3.44 0.92 0.59 0.18 1.94 0.38 0.91 0.30 2.74 0.87 0.70 0.19 2.52 0.58 knowledge 1.06 0.87 1.29 0.55 1.08 0.88 1.32 0.48 attitudes 0.86 0.73 1.01 0.06 0.85 0.72 1.01 0.05 behaviours 1.00 0.92 1.08 0.95 1.02 0.93 1.11 0.70 page 7 of 11 montuori et al.
bmc sports science, medicine and rehabilitation 2021 13:147 have a higher score for knowledge and attitudes are less likely to use hormones. gym trainees constitute an important target for dietary supplement markets and professional bodybuilders fre- quently consume banned substances and hormones in large dosages 4, 33, 34. the chosen population, there- fore, being made up of professional and non-professional bodybuilders, should place itself between the two popu- lations indicated above.
nevertheless, the prevalence of dietary supplements use we found 81.31 is higher than described in most recent studies in gym users 36.8 43.8 5, 3436, but it is closer to what is reported by morrison et al. 2004 in usa gym trainees 84.7 37. it is interesting to note that in international athletes and professional bodybuilders the prevalence of the use of supplements is 82.2 and 100, respectively 4, 32.
the prevalence of steroid hormones use among bodybuilders reported in the literature is between 83.3 and 72.9 4, 25. in the present study, only 35.51 of subjects report using hormones. this discrepancy would be attributable to the belonging of the subjects to the non-professional category.
however, the discrepancies in the reported prevalence rates of supplements and hormones use may be related to sociodemographic and cultural characteristics, the type of gyms included or methodologic aspects, namely what was considered to be a supplement or hormone and the method of data acquisition. however, research indicates that direct questioning of sensitive information, such as the use of performance enhancing drugs, is character- ized by underreporting 28.
we found that supplement and hormones consumption was more prevalent among men, although not statistically significant. even though the role of gender as a determinant of use is not clearly established, our result is consistent with previous studies 5, 35, 38, 39. the associated use of supplements and hormones is consistent with what is already present in literature, con- firming the trend towards polypharmacotherapy 25.
to our knowledge, the scoring method used for ana- lysing questionnaires has never been used to investigate the relationships between use of supplements and hor- mones and risk factors. moreover, in literature there are several articles that associate the frequency or reasons of exercise with the use of substances, characterizing them as factors of considerable influence in the athletes decision-making process 36, 40.
therefore, we decided to choose 4 outcome variables that characterized the entire decision-making process of the athletes to evaluate which associations were with modifiable and non-modi- fiable factors. in particular, from the multinomial logistic analysis, it emerges that female subjects tend to prac- tice bodybuilding less frequently. this attitude is likely to reflect specific cultural characteristics.
gwizdek et al. reported that gender did not have any significant influ- ence on exercise dependence 41. the data of considerable interest that emerged from multivariable models is the role of knowledge in the choice of the substances used.
it seems, in fact, that sub- jects with higher education attainment, and with a higher score in the knowledge section, are able to discriminate between supplements and hormones, know the differ- ences and seem able to choose the substance that harms them less to health. alhomoud et al. suggest that there table 3 association between knowledge, attitudes, and behaviour and bodybuilding reasons
x, y statistically significant p values 0.05 are in bold estimates were derived from multivariable logistic regression models adjusted for age, gender, bmi, education attainment, employment, smoking and the remaining outcome variables partially adjusted model 1 partially adjusted model 2 partially adjusted model 3 partially adjusted model 4 fully adjusted model or 95 ci p or 95 ci p or 95 ci p or 95 ci p or 95 ci p age 0.97 0.93 1.03 0.38 0.97 0.92 1.03 0.38 0.97 0.92 1.03 0.44 0.97 0.93 1.03 0.40 0.97 0.92 1.03 0.46 sex f 0.48 0.17 1.36 0.17 0.48 0.17 1.36 0.17 0.50 0.18 1.41 0.19 0.47 0.17 1.33 0.15 0.48 0.16 1.39 0.18 bmi 0.94 0.80 1.11 0.49 0.94 0.80 1.11 0.49 0.95 0.81 1.12 0.54 0.93 0.80 1.10 0.45 0.94 0.80 1.11 0.50 education attainment 0.93 0.49 1.79 0.66 0.93 0.48 1.79 0.83 0.91 0.47 1.75 0.78 0.91 0.47 1.76 0.78 0.90 0.47 1.75 0.76 employment status 1.32 0.77 2.26 0.31 1.32 0.76 2.28 0.32 1.30 0.76 2.23 0.33 1.34 0.78 2.30 0.29 1.32 0.76 2.31 0.32 smoke 1.39 0.82 2.35 0.22 1.39 0.82 2.35 0.22 1.40 0.82 2.37 0.22 1.40 0.83 2.38 0.21 1.41 0.83 2.39 0.21 supplements use 1.98 0.64 6.11 0.24 1.97 0.61 6.32 0.25 2.11 0.67 6.66 0.20 1.89 0.60 5.91 0.27 2.06 0.62 6.90 0.24 hormones use 0.75 0.30 1.85 0.53 0.75 0.28 2.06 0.58 0.88 0.32 2.40 0.81 0.79 0.31 2.01 0.62 0.87 0.30 2.57 0.81 knowledge 1.00 0.85 1.17 0.98 0.99 0.84 1.17 0.90 attitudes 1.05 0.92 1.19 0.45 1.04 0.91 1.19 0.54 behaviours 1.02 0.95 1.09 0.56 1.01 0.94 1.09 0.69 page 8 of 11 montuori et al.
bmc sports science, medicine and rehabilitation 2021 13:147 table 4 association between knowledge, attitudes, and behaviour and use of supplements x, y statistically significant p values 0.05 are in bold estimates were derived from multivariable logistic regression models adjusted for age, gender, bmi, education attainment, employment, smoking and the remaining outcome variables partially adjusted model 1 partially adjusted model 2 partially adjusted model 3 partially adjusted model 4 fully adjusted model or 95 ci p or 95 ci p or 95 ci p or 95 ci p or 95 ci p age 0.94 0.88 1.01 0.09 0.92 0.85 0.99 0.03 0.94 0.87 1.00 0.06 0.95 0.89 1.02 0.19 0.92 0.84 0.99 0.05 sex f 3.22 0.55 18.93 0.19 4.80 0.79 29.05 0.09 2.65 0.42 16.78 0.30 2.60 0.43 15.62 0.30 2.60 0.39 17.29 0.32 bmi 0.91 0.72 1.15 0.43 0.97 0.76 1.23 0.79 0.92 0.72 1.17 0.49 0.86 0.68 1.10 0.24 0.94 0.73 1.23 0.69 education attainment 0.28 0.10 0.84 0.02 0.19 0.05 0.67 0.01 0.30 0.10 0.92 0.04 0.23 0.07 0.75 0.01 0.17 0.04 0.65 0.01 employment status 1.07 0.49 2.35 0.86 0.89 0.39 2.04 0.79 1.18 0.52 2.68 0.69 1.07 0.47 2.43 0.87 1.08 0.43 2.67 0.83 smoke 1.23 0.56 2.71 0.61 1.51 0.61 3.75 0.37 1.29 0.58 2.88 0.53 1.25 0.56 2.78 0.59 1.86 0.65 4.99 0.22 frequencies 0.83 0.17 3.95 0.82 0.84 0.16 4.40 0.84 0.60 0.11 3.16 0.55 0.95 0.20 4.44 0.94 0.61 0.11 3.38 0.57 hormones use 23.02 2.63 201.57 0.00 87.93 6.32 1223.7 0.00 13.52 1.42 128.33 0.02 33.12 3.29 333.60 0.00 61.21 3.99 939.31 0.00 knowledge 1.47 1.12 1.93 0.00 1.53 1.11 2.12 0.00 attitudes 0.85 0.69 1.05 0.14 0.77 0.60 0.98 0.03 behaviours 1.09 0.98 1.22 0.09 1.11 0.98 1.25 0.07 page 9 of 11 montuori et al.
bmc sports science, medicine and rehabilitation 2021 13:147 table 5 association between knowledge, attitudes, and behaviour and use of hormones x, y statistically significant p values 0.05 are in bold estimates were derived from multivariable logistic regression models adjusted for age, gender, bmi, education attainment, employment, smoking and the remaining outcome variables partially adjusted model 1 partially adjusted model 2 partially adjusted model 3 partially adjusted model 4 fully adjusted model or 95 ci p or 95 ci p or 95 ci p or 95 ci p or 95 ci p age 1.03 0.97 1.10 0.26 1.05 0.98 1.31 0.13 1.03 0.96 1.09 0.41 1.03 0.97 1.10 0.29 1.04 0.97 1.11 0.26 sex f 1.03 0.34 3.14 0.95 0.67 0.19 2.40 0.54 0.73 0.21 2.57 0.62 1.12 0.36 3.46 0.85 0.47 0.12 1.93 0.30 bmi 1.18 0.99 1.40 0.06 1.16 0.95 1.42 0.15 1.11 0.90 1.36 0.32 1.19 1.00 1.42 0.05 1.08 0.86 1.36 0.49 education attainment 1.11 0.56 1.20 0.76 1.38 0.64 2.95 0.41 1.36 0.63 2.94 0.42 1.25 0.61 2.56 0.54 1.56 0.68 3.59 0.30 employment status 0.88 0.50 1.56 0.67 1.24 0.63 2.42 0.53 1.02 0.54 1.92 0.95 0.86 0.48 1.53 0.61 1.27 0.62 2.61 0.51 smoke 0.79 0.45 1.39 0.42 0.99 0.52 1.88 0.98 0.77 0.40 1.45 0.41 0.78 0.43 1.38 0.39 0.94 0.47 1.88 0.86 frequencies 0.86 0.29 2.48 0.78 1.10 0.31 3.89 0.89 0.57 0.17 1.95 0.37 0.90 0.29 2.73 0.85 0.72 0.17 2.96 0.65 supplements use 21.07 2.47 179.66 0.00 47.04 4.78 463.20 0.00 11.21 1.24 101.27 0.03 24.29 2.80 210.70 0.00 30.25 2.51 365.24 0.00 knowledge 0.65 0.52 0.81 0.00 0.68 0.54 0.87 0.00 attitudes 0.71 0.60 0.84 0.00 0.75 0.62 0.90 0.00 behaviours 0.93 0.86 1.00 0.05 1.00 0.91 1.09 0.99 page 10 of 11 montuori et al.
bmc sports science, medicine and rehabilitation 2021 13:147 are significant differences in the knowledge of health sci- ences and non-health sciences students pertaining to the health benefits and safety of these supplements, what they are and the source of information and help which should be sought when using them 33. to the best of our knowledge, there are no specific studies conducted on the population of amateur bodybuilders.
the present study is one of the few that investigates the use of supplements and hormones among amateur body- builders by integrating the data with that of ad hoc scores on knowledge, attitudes and behaviours. this approach allows us to understand which factors can be used to change behaviours and gain health. the present study, however, has some limitations.
first of all, a complete list of substances considered supplements or hormones has not been provided and the result could be strongly influ- enced by the subjects personal culture. hence, the ability to act without conditioning may have overestimated the use of supplements and underestimated the use of hor- mones. the results obtained, however, compared with lit- erature, lead us to believe that they are not too far from reality.
secondly, the main source of information was not requested in a specific question. however, 6 questions in the behavior section concern the main sources of infor- mation gym, internet, doctornutritionist and can offer an overview, albeit not exhaustive, of the issue. in retro- spect, we realized that it could be useful to know where the correct information was coming from.
in addition, a question on whether use was based on medical advice or not was not included in the tool and it is difficult to gen- eralize the results because the study was carried out in province of naples only.
finally, we suspect the variable scoring system likely did not capture all differences to be identified, although, to better identify the role of the sin- gle scores and their association with the other outcome variables, it was decided to use partially adjusted models and a fully adjusted model.
conclusions the high prevalence of dietary supplement use among naples bodybuilders reflects a public health concern as, although there are supplements that appear to be effec- tive, indiscriminate use can be correlated with serious health risks. the prevalence of hormone use, although lower than reported in the literature, is similarly a wor- rying public health problem. the two problems appear related as evidenced by frequent combined use.
better knowledge can lead to an informed use of these sub- stances. it is desirable that gym instructors and coaches, who are the people who are most likely to interface with such athletes, should be sufficiently trained to be able to provide accurate and scientifically sound information on dietary supplements and hormones to the gym users.
health professionals, including physicians, dietitians, and pharmacists, should combine their expertise with that of coaches and athletic trainers in order to provide more comprehensive guidance to the exercisers. specific and multidisciplinary health education programs could be created involving prevention departments and local health authorities. abbreviations ds: dietary supplements; h: hormones; n: number; sd: standard deviation; f: female; m: male; bmi: body mass index.
supplementary information the online version contains supplementary material available at https:doi. org10.1186s13102-021-00378-x. additional file 1. anonymous questionnaire on knowledge, attitudes and behaviors regarding the use of food supplements in body builders. the questionnaire mirrored on existing questionnaires and adapted, consists of questions focusing on bodybuilding, supplements and hormones. acknowledgements not applicable.
authors contributions pm, il, rp, mt designed the study; il, rn, dc, cp, edr collected data. il, rp, and mt analysed data. pm, il, rp drafted a preliminary version of this manuscript. all authors read and approved the final manuscript. funding no funding has been received for this work. availability of data and materials the questionnaire used during the current study is included in this published article and its supplementary information files.
declarations ethics approval and consent to participate informed consent was obtained from each participant, the project was approved by the ethics committee of medical school of the university federico ii and all methods were carried out in accordance with relevant guidelines and regulations. consent for publication not applicable. competing interests the authors declare that they have no competing interests. received: 3 february 2021 accepted: 5 november 2021
